The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer by Homer



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Iliad of Homer

Author: Homer

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #6130]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO 8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***





The Iliad of Homer


Translated by Alexander Pope,

with notes by the
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.

and

Flaxman's Designs.

1899





CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION.
POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER
BOOK I.
BOOK II.
BOOK III.
BOOK IV.
BOOK V.
BOOK VI.
BOOK VII.
BOOK VIII.
BOOK IX.
BOOK X.
BOOK XI.
BOOK XII.
BOOK XIII.
BOOK XIV.
BOOK XV.
BOOK XVI.
BOOK XVII.
BOOK XVIII.
BOOK XIX.
BOOK XX.
BOOK XXI.
BOOK XXII.
BOOK XXIII.
BOOK XXIV.
CONCLUDING NOTE.





ILLUSTRATIONS


HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.
MARS.
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.
VULCAN.
JUPITER.
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.
NEPTUNE.
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.
VENUS.
Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.
Map of the Plain of Troy.
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.
JUNO.
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
BOWS AND BOW CASE.
IRIS.
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.
GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.
THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.
PLUTO.
THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.
GREEK GALLEY.
PROSERPINE.
ACHILLES.
DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.
THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.
HERCULES.
POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.
GREEK ALTAR.
NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.
GREEK EARRINGS.
SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.
GREEK SHIELD.
BACCHUS.
AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.
CASTOR AND POLLUX.
Buckles.
DIANA.
SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.
CSCULAPIUS.
FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.
VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.
THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.
JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.
TRIPOD.
THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.
VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.
THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.
HERCULES.
THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.
CENTAUR.
ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.
THE BATH.
ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.
THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.
CERES.
HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.
IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.
FUNERAL OF HECTOR.





INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the most
part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very gradual
character of our education, we must continually forget, and emancipate
ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set aside old
notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be daily
unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and anxiety to
acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu of
their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues of
sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as powerful a
touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy scepticism of a
temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of conservatism, or the
impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church. History and tradition,
whether of ancient or comparatively recent times, are subjected to very
different handling from that which the indulgence or credulity of former
ages could allow. Mere statements are jealously watched, and the motives
of the writer form as important an ingredient in the analysis of his
history, as the facts he records. Probability is a powerful and
troublesome test; and it is by this troublesome standard that a large
portion of historical evidence is sifted. Consistency is no less
pertinacious and exacting in its demands. In brief, to write a history, we
must know more than mere facts. Human nature, viewed under an induction of
extended experience, is the best help to the criticism of human history.
Historical characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form correct
views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a great
whole--we must measure them by their relation to the mass of beings by whom
they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents in their lives or
condition which tradition has handed down to us, we must rather consider
the general bearing of the whole narrative, than the respective
probability of its details.

It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere(1) have, perhaps,
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all three
has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left us
little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in which
critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon everything
else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or less of doubt
and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the contradictions of
Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one of the _dramatis
personae_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in style. He appears as
the enunciator of opinions as different in their tone as those of the
writers who have handed them down. When we have read Plato _or_ Xenophon,
we think we know something of Socrates; when we have fairly read and
examined both, we feel convinced that we are something worse than
ignorant.

It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny the
personal or real existence of men and things whose life and condition were
too much for our belief. This system--which has often comforted the
religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of Strauss for those
of the New Testament--has been of incalculable value to the historical
theorists of the last and present centuries. To question the existence of
Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than to believe in
that of Romulus. To deny a fact related in Herodotus, because it is
inconsistent with a theory developed from an Assyrian inscription which no
two scholars read in the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in
the good-natured old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has
idealized--_Numa Pompilius._

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer, and
the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free permission
to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all written tradition,
concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and Odyssey. What few
authorities exist on the subject, are summarily dismissed, although the
arguments appear to run in a circle. "This cannot be true, because it is
not true; and, that is not true, because it cannot be true." Such seems to
be the style, in which testimony upon testimony, statement upon statement,
is consigned to denial and oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of the
Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken of the
treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of Cumae in Colia, was, at an early
period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of Greece.
Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes. Although poor,
he married, and the result of the union was a girl named Critheis. The
girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the guardianship of
Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this maiden that we "are
indebted for so much happiness." Homer was the first fruit of her juvenile
frailty, and received the name of Melesigenes, from having been born near
the river Meles, in Boeotia, whither Critheis had been transported in
order to save her reputation.

"At this time," continues our narrative, "there lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being married,
engaged Critheis to manage his household, and spin the flax he received as
the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was her performance
of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made proposals of
marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement, willing to adopt her
son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man, if he were carefully
brought up."

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon followed.
Melesigenes carried on his adopted father's school with great success,
exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna, but also of
the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially in the
exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these visitors, one
Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who evinced a knowledge and
intelligence rarely found in those times, persuaded Melesigenes to close
his school, and accompany him on his travels. He promised not only to pay
his expenses, but to furnish him with a further stipend, urging, that,
"While he was yet young, it was fitting that he should see with his own
eyes the countries and cities which might hereafter be the subjects of his
discourses." Melesigenes consented, and set out with his patron,
"examining all the curiosities of the countries they visited, and
informing himself of everything by interrogating those whom he met." We
may also suppose, that he wrote memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of
preservation(2) Having set sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached
Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who had already suffered in his eyes, became
much worse, and Mentes, who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to
the medical superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of
Alcinor. Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly
became acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards
formed the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that
it was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.(3)

But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae. Here
his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of one
Tychias, an armourer. "And up to my time," continued the author, "the
inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a recitation
of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also a poplar
grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes arrived".(4)

But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph on
Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater probability,
been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.(5)

Arrived at Cumae, he frequented the _converzationes_(6) of the old men,
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a public
maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously  renowned. They
avowed their willingness to support him in the measure he proposed, and
procured him an audience in the council. Having made the speech, with the
purport of which our author has forgotten to acquaint us, he retired, and
left them to debate respecting the answer to be given to his proposal.

The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poet's demand,
but one man observed that "if they were to feed _Homers,_ they would be
encumbered with a multitude of useless people." "From this circumstance,"
says the writer, "Melesigenes acquired the name of Homer, for the Cumans
call blind men _Homers._"(7) With a love of economy, which shows how
similar the world has always been in its treatment of literary men, the
pension was denied, and the poet vented his disappointment in a wish that
Cumoea might never produce a poet capable of giving it renown and glory.

At Phocoea, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient poetry
to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary publishers,
neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him. At his
departure, Homer is said to have observed: "O Thestorides, of the many
things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more unintelligible
than the human heart."(8)

Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him recite,
acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a profitable
livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at once determined
him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be setting sail
thither, but he found one ready to Start for Erythrae, a town of Ionia,
which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the seamen to allow him to
accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a favourable wind, and prayed
that he might be able to expose the imposture of Thestorides, who, by his
breach of hospitality, had drawn down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty, reached
the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure, which we will
continue in the words of our author. "Having set out from Pithys, Homer
went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were pasturing. The
dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus (for that was the
name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up quickly, called off his
dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For or some time he stood wondering
how a blind man should have reached such a place alone, and what could be
his design in coming. He then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and
how he had come to desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he
stood in need. Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his
misfortunes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and led him to
his cot, and having lit a fire, bade him sup.(9)

"The dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according to
their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O Glaucus, my
friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs their supper at
the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since, whilst they watch, nor
thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author. Having
finished supper, they banqueted(10) afresh on conversation, Homer
narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had visited.

At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left Homer
at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus, a place
near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole story
respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to what he
said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and feeding maimed
and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the stranger to him.

Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him, assuring
him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon showed that
the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general knowledge, and the
Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the charge of his
children.(11)

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry. "To
this day," says Chandler,(12) "the most curious remain is that which has
been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the coast, at
some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have been an open
temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape is oval, and in
the centre is the image of the goddess, the head and an arm wanting. She
is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair has a lion carved on each
side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a low rim, or seat, and
about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of the mountain, is rude,
indistinct, and probably of the most remote antiquity."

So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable fortune.
He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single, the other
married a Chian.

The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the personages
of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already been
mentioned:--

"In his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his poem
as the companion of Ulysses,(13) in return for the care taken of him when
afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to Phemius, who
had given him both sustenance and instruction."

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to visit
Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is said, made
some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity of the
Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,(14) he sent out
for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him in
Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in celebrating the
Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave great satisfaction,
and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon festivals, he earned a
subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, with whose children he was
very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios, now
Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his death
arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma proposed
by some fishermen's children.(15)

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we possess,
and so broad are the evidences of its historical worthlessness, that it is
scarcely necessary to point them out in detail. Let us now consider some
of the opinions to which a persevering, patient, and learned--but by no
means consistent--series of investigations has led. In doing so, I profess
to bring forward statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or
probability.

"Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who have
done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The majestic
stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the Nile, through
many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the Nile, its fountains
will ever remain concealed."

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics has
eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the Homeric
question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he proceeds:--

"It seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the region
of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The creations of
genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for the most part,
created far out of the reach of observation. If we were in possession of
all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly explain the origin
of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in all essential points,
must have remained the secret of the poet." (16)

From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of human
nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic investigation, let
us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer an individual?(17) or
were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an ingenious arrangement of
fragments by earlier poets?

Well has Landor remarked: "Some tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our devotion
to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know what is good
for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our admiration of good.
No man living venerates Homer more than I do." (18)

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and fostered,
without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions by minute
analysis--our editorial office compels us to give some attention to the
doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric question is beset, and to
entreat our reader, for a brief period, to prefer his judgment to his
imagination, and to condescend to dry details.

Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of this
unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must express my
sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following remarks:--

"We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the better,
the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its original
composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that its primitive
integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to assert, that the
minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not the best qualification
for the profound feeling, the comprehensive conception of an harmonious
whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be no judge of the symmetry of the
human frame: and we would take the opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on
the proportions and general beauty of a form, rather than that of Mr.
Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

"There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines of
Pope.--

  "'The critic eye--that microscope of wit
  Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
  How parts relate to parts, or they to whole
  The body's harmony, the beaming soul,
  Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
  When man's whole frame is obvious to a flea.'"(19)

Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning the
unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and cautious
Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,(20) the
authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern critics.
Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an opinion touching
the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the Iliad,(21) and, among a
mass of ancient authors, whose very names(22) it would be tedious to
detail, no suspicion of the personal non-existence of Homer ever arose. So
far, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favour of our early ideas on
the subject; let us now see what are the discoveries to which more modern
investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on the
subject, and we find Bentley remarking that "Homer wrote a sequel of songs
and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and good cheer,
at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs were not
collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about Peisistratus'
time, about five hundred years after."(23)

Two French writers--Hedelin and Perrault--avowed a similar scepticism on the
subject; but it is in the "Scienza Nuova" of Battista Vico, that we first
meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf with so
much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian theory that we
have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold hypothesis, which we
will detail in the words of Grote(24)--

"Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of the
Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by no means
the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously announced
by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent portions of the
Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into any compact body and
unchangeable order, until the days of Peisistratus, in the sixth century
before Christ. As a step towards that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no
written copies of either poem could be shown to have existed during the
earlier times, to which their composition is referred; and that without
writing, neither the perfect symmetry of so complicated a work could have
been originally conceived by any poet, nor, if realized by him,
transmitted with assurance to posterity. The absence of easy and
convenient writing, such as must be indispensably supposed for long
manuscripts, among the early Greeks, was thus one of the points in Wolf's
case against the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch,
and other leading opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the
other seems to have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been
considered incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character
of the Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from
the beginning.

"To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that view
of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to controvert it, we
were driven to the necessity of admitting long written poems, in the ninth
century before the Christian aera. Few things, in my opinion, can be more
improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight, opposed as he is to the Wolfian
hypothesis, admits this no less than Wolf himself. The traces of writing
in Greece, even in the seventh century before the Christian aera, are
exceedingly trifling. We have no remaining inscription earlier than the
fortieth Olympiad, and the early inscriptions are rude and unskilfully
executed; nor can we even assure ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonides
of Amorgus, Kallinus, Tyrtaeus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and
lyric poets, committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the
practice of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which
authorizes us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the
famous ordinance of Solon, with regard to the rhapsodies at the
Panathenaea: but for what length of time previously manuscripts had
existed, we are unable to say.

"Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry--for they admit generally
that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and heard,--but upon
the supposed necessity that there must have been manuscripts to ensure the
preservation of the poems--the unassisted memory of reciters being neither
sufficient nor trustworthy. But here we only escape a smaller difficulty
by running into a greater; for the existence of trained bards, gifted with
extraordinary memory, (25) is far less astonishing than that of long
manuscripts, in an age essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when
even suitable instruments and materials for the process are not obvious.
Moreover, there is a strong positive reason for believing that the bard
was under no necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a
manuscript; for if such had been the fact, blindness would have been a
disqualification for the profession, which we know that it was not, as
well from the example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the
blind bard of Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as
well as the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer
himself. The author of that hymn, be he who he may, could never have
described a blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he
had been conscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by
constant reference to the manuscript in his chest."

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon which
even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond a doubt,
that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a considerable
change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the Homeric poems
could have suffered by this change, had written copies been preserved. If
Chaucer's poetry, for instance, had not been written, it could only have
come down to us in a softened form, more like the effeminate version of
Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble original.

"At what period," continues Grote, "these poems, or indeed any other Greek
poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture, though
there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of Solon. If, in
the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any more determinate
period, the question a once suggests itself, What were the purposes which,
in that state of society, a manuscript at its first commencement must have
been intended to answer? For whom was a written Iliad necessary? Not for
the rhapsodes; for with them it was not only planted in the memory, but
also interwoven with the feelings, and conceived in conjunction with all
those flexions and intonations of voice, pauses, and other oral artifices
which were required for emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript
could never reproduce. Not for the general public--they were accustomed to
receive it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a
solemn and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad
would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class
of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed. If
we could discover at what time such a class first began to be formed, we
should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic poems were
first committed to writing. Now the period which may with the greatest
probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the formation even of
the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle of the seventh
century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C. 630), the age of
Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, &c. I ground this
supposition on the change then operated in the character and tendencies of
Grecian poetry and music--the elegiac and the iambic measures having been
introduced as rivals to the primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions
having been transferred from the epical past to the affairs of present and
real life. Such a change was important at a time when poetry was the only
known mode of publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable,
yet the nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking
at the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric rhapsodies,
just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and eulogized the Thebais
as the production of Homer. There seems, therefore, ground for
conjecturing that (for the use of this newly-formed and important, but
very narrow class), manuscripts of the Homeric poems and other old
epics,--the Thebais and the Cypria, as well as the Iliad and the
Odyssey,--began to be compiled towards the middle of the seventh century
(B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian commerce, which took place
about the same period, would furnish increased facilities for obtaining
the requisite papyrus to write upon. A reading class, when once formed,
would doubtless slowly increase, and the number of manuscripts along with
it; so that before the time of Solon, fifty years afterwards, both readers
and manuscripts, though still comparatively few, might have attained a
certain recognized authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against
the carelessness of individual rhapsodes."(26)

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of the
credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations--


    "There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
    throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
    compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast
    into its present stately and harmonious form by the directions of
    the Athenian ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the
    bright period of Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited
    little more than the fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus,
    Anacreon, and Simonides were employed in the noble task of
    compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much must have been done to
    arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is almost incredible,
    that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should not remain.
    Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies which no
    doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
    Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have
    perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
    caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among
    the heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in
    reducing the Homeric language to its primitive form; however,
    finally, the Attic dialect may not have assumed all its more
    marked and distinguishing characteristics--still it is difficult to
    suppose that the language, particularly in the joinings and
    transitions, and connecting parts, should not more clearly betray
    the incongruity between the more ancient and modern forms of
    expression. It is not quite in character with such a period to
    imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an imperfect poem
    in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott has done in
    his continuation of Sir Tristram.

    "If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of
    Athenian compilation are discoverable in the language of the
    poems, the total absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps
    no less worthy of observation. In later, and it may fairly be
    suspected in earlier times, the Athenians were more than
    ordinarily jealous of the fame of their ancestors. But, amid all
    the traditions of the glories of early Greece embodied in the
    Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and insignificant
    part. Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, Mr.
    Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible, indeed, that
    in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic fact,
    that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
    the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the
    chieftain of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his
    forces, may have been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian
    sovereign; the preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the
    Trojan war may thus have forced the national feeling of the
    Athenians to yield to their taste. The songs which spoke of their
    own great ancestor were, no doubt, of far inferior sublimity and
    popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid would have been much
    more likely to have emanated from an Athenian synod of compilers
    of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid. Could France
    have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the hero of
    the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
    sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all
    its direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the
    poetic cycle, as to admit no rivalry,--it is still surprising, that
    throughout the whole poem the _callida junctura_ should never
    betray the workmanship of an Athenian hand, and that the national
    spirit of a race, who have at a later period not inaptly been
    compared to our self admiring neighbours, the French, should
    submit with lofty self denial to the almost total exclusion of
    their own ancestors--or, at least, to the questionable dignity of
    only having produced a leader tolerably skilled in the military
    tactics of his age."(27)


To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that Wolf's
objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey have never
been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they have failed to
enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the difficulties with
which the whole subject is beset, are rather augmented than otherwise, if
we admit his hypothesis. Nor is Lachmann's(28) modification of his theory
any better. He divides the first twenty-two books of the Iliad into
sixteen different songs, and treats as ridiculous the belief that their
amalgamation into one regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the
age of Peisistratus. This, as Grote observes, "explains the gaps and
contradictions in the narrative, but it explains nothing else." Moreover,
we find no contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called
sixteen poets concur in getting rid of the following leading men in the
first battle after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the
Euboeans; Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of
the Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes
again make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure, that
"it seems strange that any number of independent poets should have so
harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel." The
discrepancy, by which Pylaemenes, who is represented as dead in the fifth
book, weeps at his son's funeral in the thirteenth, can only be regarded
as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann's modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success, that
the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems, or,
supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by Peisistratus, and
not before his time, are essentially distinct. In short, "a man may
believe the Iliad to have been put together out of pre-existing songs,
without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the period of its first
compilation." The friends or literary _employes_ of Peisistratus must have
found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the silence of the
Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic "recension," goes far to
prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts they examined, this was either
wanting, or thought unworthy of attention.

"Moreover," he continues, "the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad or
Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age of
Peisistratus--nothing which brings to our view the alterations brought
about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined money, the
habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican governments,
the close military array, the improved construction of ships, the
Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of religious
festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c., familiar to
the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the other literary
friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to notice, even without
design, had they then, for the first time, undertaken the task of piecing
together many self existent epics into one large aggregate. Everything in
the two great Homeric poems, both in substance and in language, belongs to
an age two or three centuries earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the
interpolations (or those passages which, on the best grounds, are
pronounced to be such) betray no trace of the sixth century before Christ,
and may well have been heard by Archilochus and Kallinus--in some cases
even by Arktinus and Hesiod--as genuine Homeric matter(29) As far as the
evidences on the case, as well internal as external, enable us to judge,
we seem warranted in believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited
substantially as they now stand (always allowing for paitial divergences
of text and interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first trustworthy mark of
Grecian time; and this ancient date, let it be added, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most important attribute of the
Homeric poems, considered in reference to Grecian history; for they thus
afford us an insight into the anti-historical character of the Greeks,
enabling us to trace the subsequent forward march of the nation, and to
seize instructive contrasts between their former and their later
condition."(30)

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of Peisistratus
were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must confess, that I
can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his labours. At the same
time, so far from believing that the composition or primary arrangement of
these poems, in their present form, was the work of Peisistratus, I am
rather persuaded that the fine taste and elegant mind of that Athenian(31)
would lead him to preserve an ancient and traditional order of the poems,
rather than to patch and re-construct them according to a fanciful
hypothesis. I will not repeat the many discussions respecting whether the
poems were written or not, or whether the art of writing was known in the
time of their reputed author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read,
the less satisfied we are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version of
the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical probability
must be measured by that of many others relating to the Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt, made
by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like consistency. It
is as follows:--


    "No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common
    sailors of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to 'discourse
    in excellent music' among them. Many of these, like those of the
    negroes in the United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to
    events passing around them. But what was passing around them? The
    grand events of a spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to
    impress themselves, as the mystical legends of former times had
    done, upon their memory; besides which, a retentive memory was
    deemed a virtue of the first water, and was cultivated accordingly
    in those ancient times. Ballads at first, and down to the
    beginning of the war with Troy, were merely recitations, with an
    intonation. Then followed a species of recitative, probably with
    an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the memory
    considerably.

    "It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war,
    that a poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides,
    but most probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be
    made of great utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the
    social position of Hellas, and, as a collection, he published
    these lays, connecting them by a tale of his own. This poem now
    exists, under the title of the 'Odyssea.' The author, however, did
    not affix his own name to the poem, which, in fact, was, great
    part of it, remodelled from the archaic dialect of Crete, in which
    tongue the ballads were found by him. He therefore called it the
    poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is rather a proof of
    his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging arrangement of
    other people's ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed, arguing
    for the unity of authorship, 'a great poet might have re-cast
    pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no
    mere arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.'

    "While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a
    ballad, recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble
    mind seized the hint that there presented itself, and the
    Achilleis(32) grew under his hand. Unity of design, however,
    caused him to publish the poem under the same pseudonyme as his
    former work: and the disjointed lays of the ancient bards were
    joined together, like those relating to the Cid, into a chronicle
    history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that the poem was
    destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but, first,
    the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
    corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the
    streets, assemblies, and agoras. However, Solon first, and then
    Peisistratus, and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the
    poems, and restored the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their
    original integrity in a great measure."(33)


Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which have
developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I must
still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of the
Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations disfigure
them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here and there
have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of the copyist,
would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a higher
criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or enjoy
these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of their one
author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari eum jus
fasque sit,_ I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of historical
evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these great works to
a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal evidence, and that
which springs from the deepest and most immediate impulse of the soul,
also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiae of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise. Indeed,
considering the character of some of my own books, such an attempt would
be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its importance in a
philological view, I am inclined to set little store on its aesthetic
value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the emendations made upon
poets are mere alterations, some of which, had they been suggested to the
author by his Maecenas or Africanus, he would probably have adopted.
Moreover, those who are most exact in laying down rules of verbal
criticism and interpretation, are often least competent to carry out their
own precepts. Grammarians are not poets by profession, but may be so _per
accidens._ I do not at this moment remember two emendations on Homer,
calculated to substantially improve the poetry of a passage, although a
mass of remarks, from Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history
of a thousand minute points, without which our Greek knowledge would be
gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent in everything but their wish
to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book after book,
passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a collection of
fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the works of some
great man, find that they have been put off with a vile counterfeit got up
at second hand. If we compare the theories of Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and
others, we shall feel better satisfied of the utter uncertainty of
criticism than of the apocryphal position of Homer. One rejects what
another considers the turning-point of his theory. One cuts a supposed
knot by expunging what another would explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon as a
literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill, seems to
revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies attributed to Seneca
are by _four_ different authors.(34) Now, I will venture to assert, that
these tragedies are so uniform, not only in their borrowed phraseology--a
phraseology with which writers like Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were
more charmed than ourselves--in their freedom from real poetry, and last,
but not least, in an ultra-refined and consistent abandonment of good
taste, that few writers of the present day would question the capabilities
of the same gentleman, be he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but
a great many more equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin
astonished the world with the startling announcement that the Cneid of
Virgil, and the satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without
wishing to say one word of disrespect against the industry and
learning--nay, the refined acuteness--which scholars, like Wolf, have
bestowed upon this subject, I must express my fears, that many of our
modern Homeric theories will become matter for the surprise and
entertainment, rather than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help
thinking, that the literary history of more recent times will account for
many points of difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to
a period so remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus were
of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason why
corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in his
day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should have
given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after all, the
main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand too great a
sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully appeals, and
which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has sought to rob
us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much violence to that
inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with love and admiration
for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author of the Iliad a mere
compiler, is to degrade the powers of human invention; to elevate
analytical judgment at the expense of the most ennobling impulses of the
soul; and to forget the ocean in the contemplation of a polypus. There is
a catholicity, so to speak, in the very name of Homer. Our faith in the
author of the Iliad may be a mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us
a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in believing
in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers round the bed
of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth of imagination
which a host of imitators could not exhaust,--still I am far from wishing
to deny that the author of these great poems found a rich fund of
tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from whence he might derive
both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to _use_ existing
romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to patch up the poem
itself from such materials. What consistency of style and execution can be
hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what bad taste and tedium will
not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other bards,
are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In fact, the
most original writer is still drawing upon outward impressions--nay, even
his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents which support and feed the
impulses of imagination. But unless there be some grand pervading
principle--some invisible, yet most distinctly stamped archetypus of the
great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never come to the birth. Traditions
the most picturesque, episodes the most pathetic, local associations
teeming with the thoughts of gods and great men, may crowd in one mighty
vision, or reveal themselves in more substantial forms to the mind of the
poet; but, except the power to create a grand whole, to which these shall
be but as details and embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but
a scrap-book, a parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each
other in their wild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters,
which will require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware as
I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief, it
still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved for a
higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature intended
to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which the
greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were faith no
virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our ignorance on any
matter. But we are too well taught the contrary lesson; and it seems as
though our faith should be especially tried touching the men and the
events which have wrought most influence upon the condition of humanity.
And there is a kind of sacredness attached to the memory of the great and
the good, which seems to bid us repulse the scepticism which would
allegorize their existence into a pleasing apologue, and measure the
giants of intellect by an homeopathic dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply wrapped
in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots which mere
analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must transform
ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination must fight over
the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the same sense of injury,
as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but attain this degree of
enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely suffice for the reading of
Homer), we shall feel that the poems of Homer are not only the work of one
writer, but of the greatest writer that ever touched the hearts of men by
the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems their
powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who is
evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely observes:--


    "It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No
    poet has ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his
    countrymen. Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the
    character of other nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that
    of the Greeks. This is a feature in their character which was not
    wholly erased even in the period of their degeneracy. When
    lawgivers and sages appeared in Greece, the work of the poet had
    already been accomplished; and they paid homage to his superior
    genius. He held up before his nation the mirror, in which they
    were to behold the world of gods and heroes no less than of feeble
    mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity and truth. His
    poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature; on the
    love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
    outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured
    forth from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of
    man; and therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every
    breast which cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to
    his immortal spirit, from another heaven than any of which he
    dreamed on earth, to look down on his race, to see the nations
    from the fields of Asia to the forests of Hercynia, performing
    pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic wand caused to flow;
    if it is permitted to him to view the vast assemblage of grand, of
    elevated, of glorious productions, which had been called into
    being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal spirit may
    reside, this alone would suffice to complete his happiness."(35)


Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the "Apotheosis of
Homer"(36) is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association,
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds, is
lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more we
read, and the more we think--think as becomes the readers of Homer,--the
more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry gave us this
rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the means of its
preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury of taste and
eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it a mere centre
around which to drive a series of theories, whose wildness is only
equalled by their inconsistency with each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope's translation, I will content myself with a brief account
of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer who has done
it full justice(37):--


    "This poem," says Coleridge, "is a short mock-heroic of ancient
    date. The text varies in different editions, and is obviously
    disturbed and corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to
    have been a juvenile essay of Homer's genius; others have
    attributed it to the same Pigrees, mentioned above, and whose
    reputation for humour seems to have invited the appropriation of
    any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was uncertain; so
    little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies, know or
    care about that department of criticism employed in determining
    the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being
    a youthful prolusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that
    from the beginning to the end it is a plain and palpable parody,
    not only of the general spirit, but of the numerous passages of
    the Iliad itself; and even, if no such intention to parody were
    discernible in it, the objection would still remain, that to
    suppose a work of mere burlesque to be the primary effort of
    poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse that order in the
    development of national taste, which the history of every other
    people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost ascertained to
    be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society much more
    refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that any
    popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
    contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
    other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see,
    with as much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe
    that none of them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the
    usage of the word deltos, "writing tablet," instead of diphthera,
    "skin," which, according to Herod. 5, 58, was the material
    employed by the Asiatic Greeks for that purpose, that this poem
    was another offspring of Attic ingenuity; and generally that the
    familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a strong argument against
    so ancient a date for its composition."


Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope's design,
I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation, and on my own
purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby. It
is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his whole
work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes, which
prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical attainments
were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it is probable that
these examinations were the result rather of the contradictory versions
already existing, than of a desire to make a perfect transcript of the
original. And in those days, what is called literal translation was less
cultivated than at present. If something like the general sense could be
decorated with the easy gracefulness of a practised poet; if the charms of
metrical cadence and a pleasing fluency could be made consistent with a
fair interpretation of the poet's meaning, his _words_ were less jealously
sought for, and those who could read so good a poem as Pope's Iliad had
fair reason to be satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope's translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at it
as a most delightful work in itself,--a work which is as much a part of
English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn from
our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
amphikupellon being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from us
to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman's fine,
bold, rough old English;--far be it from, us to hold up his translation as
what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still dismiss Pope's
Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the consciousness that they must
have read a very great number of books before they have read its fellow.

As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up without
pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general reader. Having
some little time since translated all the works of Homer for another
publisher, I might have brought a large amount of accumulated matter,
sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the text. But Pope's
version was no field for such a display; and my purpose was to touch
briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions, to notice occasionally
_some_ departures from the original, and to give a few parallel passages
from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter task I cannot pretend to
novelty, but I trust that my other annotations, while utterly disclaiming
high scholastic views, will be found to convey as much as is wanted; at
least, as far as the necessary limits of these volumes could be expected
to admit. To write a commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I
have made Pope's translation a little more entertaining and instructive to
a mass of miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

                                                   THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.

_Christ Church._





POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER


Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with
him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular excellences;
but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a wonder if he has
ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most excelled in that
which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the invention that, in
different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses: the utmost stretch of
human study, learning, and industry, which masters everything besides, can
never attain to this. It furnishes art with all her materials, and without
it judgment itself can at best but "steal wisely:" for art is only like a
prudent steward that lives on managing the riches of nature. Whatever
praises may be given to works of judgment, there is not even a single
beauty in them to which the invention must not contribute: as in the most
regular gardens, art can only reduce beauties of nature to more
regularity, and such a figure, which the common eye may better take in,
and is, therefore, more entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why
common critics are inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to
a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves
to pursue their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art,
than to comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.

Our author's work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the
beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the
number of them is infinitely greater. It is like a copious nursery, which
contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of which those
who followed him have but selected some particular plants, each according
to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things are too luxuriant
it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if others are not arrived to
perfection or maturity, it is only because they are overrun and oppressed
by those of a stronger nature.

It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute that
unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no man of
a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him. What he
writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing moves, every
thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called, or a battle
fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said or done as from a
third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by the force of the
poet's imagination, and turns in one place to a hearer, in another to a
spectator. The course of his verses resembles that of the army he
describes,

  Hoid' ar' isan hosei te puri chthon pasa nemoito.

"They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it." It
is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous, is
not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its fullest
splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and others, and
becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity. Exact
disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers, may have
been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this "vivida vis animi,"
in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect or neglected,
this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even while we disapprove.
Nay, where this appears, though attended with absurdities, it brightens
all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing but its own splendour. This
fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned as through a glass, reflected
from Homer, more shining than fierce, but everywhere equal and constant:
in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in sudden, short, and interrupted
flashes: In Milton it glows like a furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour
by the force of art: in Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an
accidental fire from heaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns
everywhere clearly and everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in a
manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent parts
of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which
distinguishes him from all other authors.

This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed not
enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole compass of
nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward passions and
affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all the outward
forms and images of things for his descriptions: but wanting yet an ampler
sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and boundless walk for his
imagination, and created a world for himself in the invention of fable.
That which Aristotle calls "the soul of poetry," was first breathed into
it by Homer, I shall begin with considering him in his part, as it is
naturally the first; and I speak of it both as it means the design of a
poem, and as it is taken for fiction.

Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as, though
they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature; or of such
as, though they did, became fables by the additional episodes and manner
of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of an epic poem, "The
return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in Italy," or the like.
That of the Iliad is the "anger of Achilles," the most short and single
subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet this he has supplied with a
vaster variety of incidents and events, and crowded with a greater number
of councils, speeches, battles, and episodes of all kinds, than are to be
found even in those poems whose schemes are of the utmost latitude and
irregularity. The action is hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and
its whole duration employs not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for want of
so warm a genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as
well as a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both
Homer's poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his.
The other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it
so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of
action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time. Nor is
it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his
invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of story.
If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up their
forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus, Virgil
has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them) destroys
the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses visit the
shades, the Cneas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent after him. If he
be detained from his return by the allurements of Calypso, so is Cneas by
Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be absent from the army on the
score of a quarrel through half the poem, Rinaldo must absent himself just
as long on the like account. If he gives his hero a suit of celestial
armour, Virgil and Tasso make the same present to theirs. Virgil has not
only observed this close imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the
way, supplied the want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon,
and the taking of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word
from Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Cneas are taken from those of
Medea and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.

To proceed to the allegorical fable--If we reflect upon those innumerable
knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy which Homer is
generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories, what a new and
ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us! How fertile will
that imagination appear, which as able to clothe all the properties of
elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues and vices, in forms
and persons, and to introduce them into actions agreeable to the nature of
the things they shadowed! This is a field in which no succeeding poets
could dispute with Homer, and whatever commendations have been allowed
them on this head, are by no means for their invention in having enlarged
his circle, but for their judgment in having contracted it. For when the
mode of learning changed in the following ages, and science was delivered
in a plainer manner, it then became as reasonable in the more modern poets
to lay it aside, as it was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was
no unhappy circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that
demand upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing
all those allegorical parts of a poem.

The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the
machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the
deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece, he seems the
first who brought them into a system of machinery for poetry, and such a
one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: for we find those
authors who have been offended at the literal notion of the gods,
constantly laying their accusation against Homer as the chief support of
it. But whatever cause there might be to blame his machines in a
philosophical or religious view, they are so perfect in the poetic, that
mankind have been ever since contented to follow them: none have been able
to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the limits he has set: every
attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all the various
changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this day the gods of
poetry.

We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no
author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a variety,
or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them. Every one has
something so singularly his own, that no painter could have distinguished
them more by their features, than the poet has by their manners. Nothing
can be more exact than the distinctions he has observed in the different
degrees of virtues and vices. The single quality of courage is wonderfully
diversified in the several characters of the Iliad. That of Achilles is
furious and intractable; that of Diomede forward, yet listening to advice,
and subject to command; that of Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of
Hector, active and vigilant: the courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by
love of empire and ambition; that of Menelaus mixed with softness and
tenderness for his people: we find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in
Sarpedon a gallant and generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing
diversity to be found only in the principal quality which constitutes the
main of each character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he
takes care to give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main
characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct
in this, that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other
natural, open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage;
and this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference
of his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner;
they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, where they
are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to those of Homer.
His characters of valour are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way
peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and we see nothing that
differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of Sergestus, Cloanthus, or
the rest, In like manner it may be remarked of Statius's heroes, that an
air of impetuosity runs through them all; the same horrid and savage
courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, &c. They have a
parity of character, which makes them seem brothers of one family. I
believe when the reader is led into this tract of reflection, if he will
pursue it through the epic and tragic writers, he will be convinced how
infinitely superior, in this point, the invention of Homer was to that of
all others.

The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters; being
perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners, of those
who utter them. As there is more variety of characters in the Iliad, so
there is of speeches, than in any other poem. "Everything in it has
manner" (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is acted or
spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how small a
number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil the dramatic part is
less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches often consist of
general reflections or thoughts, which might be equally just in any
person's mouth upon the same occasion. As many of his persons have no
apparent characters, so many of his speeches escape being applied and
judged by the rule of propriety. We oftener think of the author himself
when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in Homer, all which are the
effects of a colder invention, that interests us less in the action
described. Homer makes us hearers, and Virgil leaves us readers.

If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same
presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his thoughts.
Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part Homer principally
excelled. What were alone sufficient to prove the grandeur and excellence
of his sentiments in general, is, that they have so remarkable a parity
with those of the Scripture. Duport, in his Gnomologia Homerica, has
collected innumerable instances of this sort. And it is with justice an
excellent modern writer allows, that if Virgil has not so many thoughts
that are low and vulgar, he has not so many that are sublime and noble;
and that the Roman author seldom rises into very astonishing sentiments
where he is not fired by the Iliad.

If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the
invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast
comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance of
art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and
fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various views
presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions taken off to
perfection at a heat? Nay, he not only gives us the full prospects of
things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side views, unobserved by
any painter but Homer. Nothing is so surprising as the descriptions of his
battles, which take up no less than half the Iliad, and are supplied with
so vast a variety of incidents, that no one bears a likeness to another;
such different kinds of deaths, that no two heroes are wounded in the same
manner, and such a profusion of noble ideas, that every battle rises above
the last in greatness, horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not
near that number of images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every
one has assisted himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is
evident of Virgil especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are
not drawn from his master.

If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright imagination
of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We acknowledge him
the father of poetical diction; the first who taught that "language of the
gods" to men. His expression is like the colouring of some great masters,
which discovers itself to be laid on boldly, and executed with rapidity.
It is, indeed, the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with
the greatest spirit. Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who
had found out "living words;" there are in him more daring figures and
metaphors than in any good author whatever. An arrow is "impatient" to be
on the wing, a weapon "thirsts" to drink the blood of an enemy, and the
like, yet his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great
in proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the same
degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter, as that
is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass in the
furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a greater
clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the heat more
intense.

To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected the
compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper to
poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted and
filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise conduced in
some measure to thicken the images. On this last consideration I cannot
but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of his invention, since (as
he has managed them) they are a sort of supernumerary pictures of the
persons or things to which they were joined. We see the motion of Hector's
plumes in the epithet Korythaiolos, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that
of Einosiphyllos, and so of others, which particular images could not have
been insisted upon so long as to express them in a description (though but
of a single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these epithets
is a short description.

Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not satisfied
with his language as he found it settled in any one part of Greece, but
searched through its different dialects with this particular view, to
beautify and perfect his numbers he considered these as they had a greater
mixture of vowels or consonants, and accordingly employed them as the
verse required either a greater smoothness or strength. What he most
affected was the Ionic, which has a peculiar sweetness, from its never
using contractions, and from its custom of resolving the diphthongs into
two syllables, so as to make the words open themselves with a more
spreading and sonorous fluency. With this he mingled the Attic
contractions, the broader Doric, and the feebler Colic, which often
rejects its aspirate, or takes off its accent, and completed this variety
by altering some letters with the licence of poetry. Thus his measures,
instead of being fetters to his sense, were always in readiness to run
along with the warmth of his rapture, and even to give a further
representation of his notions, in the correspondence of their sounds to
what they signified. Out of all these he has derived that harmony which
makes us confess he had not only the richest head, but the finest ear in
the world. This is so great a truth, that whoever will but consult the
tune of his verses, even without understanding them (with the same sort of
diligence as we daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will
find more sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other
language of poetry. The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the critics to
be copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just as to
ascribe it to the nature of the Latin tongue: indeed the Greek has some
advantages both from the natural sound of its words, and the turn and
cadence of its verse, which agree with the genius of no other language.
Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the utmost diligence in working
up a more intractable language to whatsoever graces it was capable of,
and, in particular, never failed to bring the sound of his line to a
beautiful agreement with its sense. If the Grecian poet has not been so
frequently celebrated on this account as the Roman, the only reason is,
that fewer critics have understood one language than the other. Dionysius
of Halicarnassus has pointed out many of our author's beauties in this
kind, in his treatise of the Composition of Words. It suffices at present
to observe of his numbers, that they flow with so much ease, as to make
one imagine Homer had no other care than to transcribe as fast as the
Muses dictated, and, at the same time, with so much force and inspiriting
vigour, that they awaken and raise us like the sound of a trumpet. They
roll along as a plentiful river, always in motion, and always full; while
we are borne away by a tide of verse, the most rapid, and yet the most
smooth imaginable.

Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us is
his invention. It is that which forms the character of each part of his
work; and accordingly we find it to have made his fable more extensive and
copious than any other, his manners more lively and strongly marked, his
speeches more affecting and transported, his sentiments more warm and
sublime, his images and descriptions more full and animated, his
expression more raised and daring, and his numbers more rapid and various.
I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with regard to any of these
heads, I have no way derogated from his character. Nothing is more absurd
or endless, than the common method of comparing eminent writers by an
opposition of particular passages in them, and forming a judgment from
thence of their merit upon the whole. We ought to have a certain knowledge
of the principal character and distinguishing excellence of each: it is in
that we are to consider him, and in proportion to his degree in that we
are to admire him. No author or man ever excelled all the world in more
than one faculty; and as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in
judgment. Not that we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because
Virgil had it in a more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention,
because Homer possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authors
had more of both than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have
less in comparison with one another. Homer was the greater genius, Virgil
the better artist. In one we most admire the man, in the other the work.
Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgil
leads us with an attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generous
profusion; Virgil bestows with a careful magnificence; Homer, like the
Nile, pours out his riches with a boundless overflow; Virgil, like a river
in its banks, with a gentle and constant stream. When we behold their
battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes they celebrate. Homer,
boundless and resistless as Achilles, bears all before him, and shines
more and more as the tumult increases; Virgil, calmly daring, like Cneas,
appears undisturbed in the midst of the action; disposes all about him,
and conquers with tranquillity. And when we look upon their machines,
Homer seems like his own Jupiter in his terrors, shaking Olympus,
scattering the lightnings, and firing the heavens: Virgil, like the same
power in his benevolence, counselling with the gods, laying plans for
empires, and regularly ordering his whole creation.

But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues, they
naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to distinguish
exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. As prudence may
sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness;
and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance, so may a great
invention to redundancy or wildness. If we look upon Homer in this view,
we shall perceive the chief objections against him to proceed from so
noble a cause as the excess of this faculty.

Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which so
much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with
gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength, exceed
what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become miracles
in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit something near
extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable performances.
Thus Homer has his "speaking horses;" and Virgil his "myrtles distilling
blood;" where the latter has not so much as contrived the easy
intervention of a deity to save the probability.

It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been thought
too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this faculty is seen
in nothing more, than in its inability to confine itself to that single
circumstance upon which the comparison is grounded: it runs out into
embellishments of additional images, which, however, are so managed as not
to overpower the main one. His similes are like pictures, where the
principal figure has not only its proportion given agreeable to the
original, but is also set off with occasional ornaments and prospects. The
same will account for his manner of heaping a number of comparisons
together in one breath, when his fancy suggested to him at once so many
various and correspondent images. The reader will easily extend this
observation to more objections of the same kind.

If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or
narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will be
found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the times he
lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the gods; and the
vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here speak a word
of the latter, as it is a point generally carried into extremes, both by
the censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be a strange partiality to
antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier,(38) "that those times and manners
are so much the more excellent, as they are more contrary to ours." Who
can be so prejudiced in their favour as to magnify the felicity of those
ages, when a spirit of revenge and cruelty, joined with the practice of
rapine and robbery, reigned through the world: when no mercy was shown but
for the sake of lucre; when the greatest princes were put to the sword,
and their wives and daughters made slaves and concubines? On the other
side, I would not be so delicate as those modern critics, who are shocked
at the servile offices and mean employments in which we sometimes see the
heroes of Homer engaged. There is a pleasure in taking a view of that
simplicity, in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding
monarchs without their guards; princes tending their flocks, and
princesses drawing water from the springs. When we read Homer, we ought to
reflect that we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world;
and those who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in
the perusal of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with
nations and people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost
three thousand years back into the remotest antiquity, and entertaining
themselves with a clear and surprising vision of things nowhere else to be
found, the only true mirror of that ancient world. By this means alone
their greatest obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates their
dislike, will become a satisfaction.

This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of the
same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the "far-darting Phoebus,"
the "blue-eyed Pallas," the "swift-footed Achilles," &c., which some have
censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated. Those of the gods
depended upon the powers and offices then believed to belong to them; and
had contracted a weight and veneration from the rites and solemn devotions
in which they were used: they were a sort of attributes with which it was
a matter of religion to salute them on all occasions, and which it was an
irreverence to omit. As for the epithets of great men, Mons. Boileau is of
opinion, that they were in the nature of surnames, and repeated as such;
for the Greeks having no names derived from their fathers, were obliged to
add some other distinction of each person; either naming his parents
expressly, or his place of birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander
the son of Philip, Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c.
Homer, therefore, complying with the custom of his country, used such
distinctive additions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have
something parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince, &c.
If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for the
repetition, I shall add a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing the world
into its different ages, has placed a fourth age, between the brazen and
the iron one, of "heroes distinct from other men; a divine race who fought
at Thebes and Troy, are called demi-gods, and live by the care of Jupiter
in the islands of the blessed." Now among the divine honours which were
paid them, they might have this also in common with the gods, not to be
mentioned without the solemnity of an epithet, and such as might be
acceptable to them by celebrating their families, actions or qualities.

What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as hardly
deserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the
course of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudicious endeavour
to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should think to raise
the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one would imagine, by
the whole course of their parallels, that these critics never so much as
heard of Homer's having written first; a consideration which whoever
compares these two poets ought to have always in his eye. Some accuse him
for the same things which they overlook or praise in the other; as when
they prefer the fable and moral of the Cneis to those of the Iliad, for
the same reasons which might set the Odyssey above the Cneis; as that the
hero is a wiser man, and the action of the one more beneficial to his
country than that of the other; or else they blame him for not doing what
he never designed; as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince
as Cneas, when the very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thus that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others
select those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as
some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of
Scaliger in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and
mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement,
oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph
in the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to a
fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer, and
that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the great
reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his times,
and the prejudice of those that followed: and in pursuance of this
principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of the
cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality the
consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or
any great author whose general character will infallibly raise many casual
additions to their reputation. This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who
yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age Homer had lived, he must
have been the greatest poet of his nation, and that he may be said in his
sense to be the master even of those who surpassed him.(39)

In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to the
honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed the
characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his followers, he
still continues superior to them. A cooler judgment may commit fewer
faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of critics: but that
warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most universal applauses which
holds the heart of a reader under the strongest enchantment. Homer not
only appears the inventor of poetry, but excels all the inventors of other
arts, in this, that he has swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded
him. What he has done admitted no increase, it only left room for
contraction or regulation. He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and
if he has failed in some of his flights, it was but because he attempted
everything. A work of this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from
the most vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and
produces the finest fruit: nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure
and profit join to make it valuable: and they who find the justest faults,
have only said that a few branches which run luxuriant through a richness
of nature, might be lopped into form to give it a more regular appearance.

Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it remains
to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief
characteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem, such
as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice it but
by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in every
particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too much
softens those, takes off from this chief character. It is the first grand
duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and unmaimed; and for the
rest, the diction and versification only are his proper province, since
these must be his own, but the others he is to take as he finds them.

It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in
our language for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no
literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior
language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that a
rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no less
in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the modern
manners of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, there is often a
light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a version almost
literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but those which are
necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original, and supporting the
poetical style of the translation: and I will venture to say, there have
not been more men misled in former times by a servile, dull adherence to
the letter, than have been deluded in ours by a chimerical, insolent hope
of raising and improving their author. It is not to be doubted, that the
fire of the poem is what a translator should principally regard, as it is
most likely to expire in his managing: however, it is his safest way to be
content with preserving this to his utmost in the whole, without
endeavouring to be more than he finds his author is, in any particular
place. It is a great secret in writing, to know when to be plain, and when
poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will
but follow modestly in his footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty,
let us raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we
ought not to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the
censure of a mere English critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to
have been more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some of
his translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of the
sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion of
simplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some
sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the certain
signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in his train,
while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an unaffected and
equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes one could sooner
pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be envied for such
commendations, as he may gain by that character of style, which his
friends must agree together to call simplicity, and the rest of the world
will call dulness. There is a graceful and dignified simplicity, as well
as a bold and sordid one; which differ as much from each other as the air
of a plain man from that of a sloven: it is one thing to be tricked up,
and another not to be dressed at all. Simplicity is the mean between
ostentation and rusticity.

This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the
Scripture and our author. One may affirm, with all respect to the inspired
writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words but what were
intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that part of the
world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his style must of
course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books than that of any
other writer. This consideration (together with what has been observed of
the parity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks, induce a translator, on
the one hand, to give in to several of those general phrases and manners
of expression, which have attained a veneration even in our language from
being used in the Old Testament; as, on the other, to avoid those which
have been appropriated to the Divinity, and in a manner consigned to
mystery and religion.

For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care
should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and
proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet. They have
something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned gravity
and shortness with which they are delivered: a grace which would be
utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a more ingenious
(that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase.

Perhaps the mixture of some Graecisms and old words after the manner of
Milton, if done without too much affectation, might not have an ill effect
in a version of this particular work, which most of any other seems to
require a venerable, antique cast. But certainly the use of modern terms
of war and government, such as "platoon, campaign, junto," or the like,
(into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be allowable;
those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat the subjects
in any living language.

There are two peculiarities in Homer's diction, which are a sort of marks
or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first sight; those
who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as defects, and those who
are, seemed pleased with them as beauties. I speak of his compound
epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the former cannot be done
literally into English without destroying the purity of our language. I
believe such should be retained as slide easily of themselves into an
English compound, without violence to the ear or to the received rules of
composition, as well as those which have received a sanction from the
authority of our best poets, and are become familiar through their use of
them; such as "the cloud-compelling Jove," &c. As for the rest, whenever
any can be as fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a
compounded one, the course to be taken is obvious.

Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image by one or
two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as the epithet
einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculous translated
literally "leaf-shaking," but affords a majestic idea in the periphrasis:
"the lofty mountain shakes his waving woods." Others that admit of
different significations, may receive an advantage from a judicious
variation, according to the occasions on which they are introduced. For
example, the epithet of Apollo, hekaebolos or "far-shooting," is capable
of two explications; one literal, in respect of the darts and bow, the
ensigns of that god; the other allegorical, with regard to the rays of the
sun; therefore, in such places where Apollo is represented as a god in
person, I would use the former interpretation; and where the effects of
the sun are described, I would make choice of the latter. Upon the whole,
it will be necessary to avoid that perpetual repetition of the same
epithets which we find in Homer, and which, though it might be
accommodated (as has been already shown) to the ear of those times, is by
no means so to ours: but one may wait for opportunities of placing them,
where they derive an additional beauty from the occasions on which they
are employed; and in doing this properly, a translator may at once show
his fancy and his judgment.

As for Homer's repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whole
narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or
hemistitch. I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these, as
neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor to
offend the reader too much on the other. The repetition is not ungraceful
in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders it a sort of
insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods to men, or from
higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or where the ceremonial
of religion seems to require it, in the solemn forms of prayers, oaths, or
the like. In other cases, I believe the best rule is, to be guided by the
nearness, or distance, at which the repetitions are placed in the
original: when they follow too close, one may vary the expression; but it
is a question, whether a professed translator be authorized to omit any:
if they be tedious, the author is to answer for it.

It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer (as has been said) is
perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every new
subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of poetry, and
attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it in the Greek,
and Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what may sometimes happen by
chance, when a writer is warm, and fully possessed of his image: however,
it may reasonably be believed they designed this, in whose verse it so
manifestly appears in a superior degree to all others. Few readers have
the ear to be judges of it: but those who have, will see I have
endeavoured at this beauty.

Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice
to Homer. I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may entertain
without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him than any
entire translation in verse has yet done. We have only those of Chapman,
Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasurable
length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce any paraphrase
more loose and rambling than his. He has frequent interpolations of four
or six lines; and I remember one in the thirteenth book of the Odyssey,
ver. 312, where he has spun twenty verses out of two. He is often mistaken
in so bold a manner, that one might think he deviated on purpose, if he
did not in other places of his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles.
He appears to have had a strong affectation of extracting new meanings out
of his author; insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of
the mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to
strain the obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in
fustian; a fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as
in the tragedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man
may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface
and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in
poetry. His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than
fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which
is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for
particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits
the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt
not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimes omits whole similes and
sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of
his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness. His poetry, as
well as Ogilby's, is too mean for criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small part
of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the
sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much regard
to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed
him in passages where he wanders from the original. However, had he
translated the whole work, I would no more have attempted Homer after him
than Virgil: his version of whom (notwithstanding some human errors) is
the most noble and spirited translation I know in any language. But the
fate of great geniuses is like that of great ministers: though they are
confessedly the first in the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied
and calumniated only for being at the head of it.

That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who
translates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and fire
which makes his chief character: in particular places, where the sense can
bear any doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, as most
agreeing with that character; to copy him in all the variations of his
style, and the different modulations of his numbers; to preserve, in the
more active or descriptive parts, a warmth and elevation; in the more
sedate or narrative, a plainness and solemnity; in the speeches, a fulness
and perspicuity; in the sentences, a shortness and gravity; not to neglect
even the little figures and turns on the words, nor sometimes the very
cast of the periods; neither to omit nor confound any rites or customs of
antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include the whole in a shorter compass
than has hitherto been done by any translator who has tolerably preserved
either the sense or poetry. What I would further recommend to him is, to
study his author rather from his own text, than from any commentaries, how
learned soever, or whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the
world; to consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the
ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these, the
Archbishop of Cambray's Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the
spirit and turn of our author; and Bossu's admirable Treatise of the Epic
Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all, with
whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever happiness
he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few; those only
who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning. For to satisfy
such a want either, is not in the nature of this undertaking; since a mere
modern wit can like nothing that is not modern, and a pedant nothing that
is not Greek.

What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am
prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets,
who are most sensible of the weight of this task. As for the worst,
whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as they
are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I was guided in
this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and by persons
for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be true, that
the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men of wit. Mr.
Addison was the first whose advice determined me to undertake this task;
who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion in such terms as I
cannot repeat without vanity. I was obliged to Sir Richard Steele for a
very early recommendation of my undertaking to the public. Dr. Swift
promoted my interest with that warmth with which he always serves his
friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel Garth are what I never
knew wanting on any occasion. I must also acknowledge, with infinite
pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well as sincere criticisms, of Mr.
Congreve, who had led me the way in translating some parts of Homer. I
must add the names of Mr. Rowe, and Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a
further opportunity of doing justice to the last, whose good nature (to
give it a great panegyric), is no less extensive than his learning. The
favour of these gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them
so true an affection. But what can I say of the honour so many of the
great have done me; while the first names of the age appear as my
subscribers, and the most distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning
as my chief encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to
find, that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not displeased
I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his excellent
Essay), so complete a praise:

  "Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
  For all books else appear so mean, so poor,
  Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read,
  And Homer will be all the books you need."

That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it is
hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing to
his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord Bolingbroke,
not more distinguished in the great scenes of business, than in all the
useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not refused to be the
critic of these sheets, and the patron of their writer: and that the noble
author of the tragedy of "Heroic Love" has continued his partiality to me,
from my writing pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself
the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their
advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several
particulars of this translation.

I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my desire
of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair. The
particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave
me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his friendship. I must
attribute to the same motive that of several others of my friends: to whom
all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by the privileges of a
familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can no way better oblige men
of their turn than by my silence.

In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would have
thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that has been
shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I can hardly
envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when I reflect on
the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy friendships,
which make the satisfaction of life. This distinction is the more to be
acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never gratified the
prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of particular men.
Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of an undertaking in
which I have experienced the candour and friendship of so many persons of
merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those years of youth that are
generally lost in a circle of follies, after a manner neither wholly
unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself.






THE ILIAD.





BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.(40)

THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.

In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseis and Briseis,
allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles. Chryses, the
father of Chryseis, and priest of Apollo, comes to the Grecian camp to
ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in the tenth year of
the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently dismissed by
Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who inflicts a pestilence
on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and encourages Chalcas to declare
the cause of it; who attributes it to the refusal of Chryseis. The king,
being obliged to send back his captive, enters into a furious contest with
Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however, as he had the absolute command
of the army, he seizes on Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent
withdraws himself and his forces from the rest of the Greeks; and
complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of
the wrong done to her son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter,
granting her suit, incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till
they are reconciled by the address of Vulcan.

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the
plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for
Jupiter's stay with the Cthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her
petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and
lastly to Olympus.

  Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
  Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
  That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
  The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
  Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
  Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.(41)
  Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
  Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!(42)

  Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour(43)
  Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
  Latona's son a dire contagion spread,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his reverent priest defied,(45)
  And for the king's offence the people died.

  For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
  His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
  Suppliant the venerable father stands;
  Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
  By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
  Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
  He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race(46)

  "Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
  May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
  Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
  But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
  And give Chryseis to these arms again;
  If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
  And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."

  The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
  Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
  Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:

  "Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
  Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
  Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
  Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
  Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
  And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
  Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
  And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
  In daily labours of the loom employ'd,
  Or doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
  Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
  Far from her native soil and weeping sire."

                 [Illustration: HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.]

                         HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.


  The trembling priest along the shore return'd,
  And in the anguish of a father mourn'd.
  Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
  Silent he wander'd by the sounding main;
  Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
  The god who darts around the world his rays.

  "O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's line,(47)
  Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,(48)
  Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
  And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shores.
  If e'er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,(49)
  Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
  God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
  Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy."

  Thus Chryses pray'd.--the favouring power attends,
  And from Olympus' lofty tops descends.
  Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;(50)
  Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
  Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
  And gloomy darkness roll'd about his head.
  The fleet in view, he twang'd his deadly bow,
  And hissing fly the feather'd fates below.
  On mules and dogs the infection first began;(51)
  And last, the vengeful arrows fix'd in man.
  For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
  The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
  But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
  Inspired by Juno, Thetis' godlike son
  Convened to council all the Grecian train;
  For much the goddess mourn'd her heroes slain.(52)
  The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
  Achilles thus the king of men address'd:

  "Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
  And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
  The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
  'Tis time to save the few remains of war.
  But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
  Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage;
  Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
  By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.(53)
  If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
  Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
  So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
  And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."

  He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
  Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
  That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
  The past, the present, and the future knew:
  Uprising slow, the venerable sage
  Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

  "Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
  Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
  First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
  Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
  For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
  And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
  Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
  Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
  For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
  'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
  To whom Pelides:--"From thy inmost soul
  Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
  E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
  To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
  And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
  Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
  No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
  Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
  Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
  The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."

  Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
  "Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
  But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
  Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
  Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
  But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
  Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
  To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.(54)
  Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
  The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."

  The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
  The monarch started from his shining throne;
  Black choler fill'd his breast that boil'd with ire,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living fire:
  "Augur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
  Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
  Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
  And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
  For this are Phoebus' oracles explored,
  To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
  For this with falsehood is my honour stain'd,
  Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
  Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
  And heavenly charms prefer to proffer'd gold?
  A maid, unmatch'd in manners as in face,
  Skill'd in each art, and crown'd with every grace;
  Not half so dear were Clytaemnestra's charms,
  When first her blooming beauties bless'd my arms.
  Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
  Our cares are only for the public weal:
  Let me be deem'd the hateful cause of all,
  And suffer, rather than my people fall.
  The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
  So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
  But since for common good I yield the fair,
  My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
  Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
  That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
  "Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
  Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
  Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
  The due reward of many a well-fought field?

  The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
  We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
  But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
  (That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
  Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
  The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
  Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
  Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."

  Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
  With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
  Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
  Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
  At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
  First let the just equivalent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and let it be
  A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
  Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
  This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
  The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;(55)
  Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
  The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
  And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
  But this when time requires.--It now remains
  We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
  And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
  With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
  Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
  And some deputed prince the charge attend:
  This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
  Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
  Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
  Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
  Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
  The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

                          [Illustration: MARS.]

                                  MARS.


  At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
  "O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
  Inglorious slave to interest, ever join'd
  With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
  What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
  Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
  What cause have I to war at thy decree?
  The distant Trojans never injured me;
  To Phthia's realms no hostile troops they led:
  Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
  Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
  And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
  Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
  Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
  Hither we sail'd, a voluntary throng,
  To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
  What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
  But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother's cause?
  Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
  Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
  And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,
  Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
  A prize as small, O tyrant! match'd with thine,
  As thy own actions if compared to mine.
  Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,
  Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
  Some trivial present to my ships I bear:
  Or barren praises pay the wounds of war.
  But know, proud monarch, I'm thy slave no more;
  My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia's shore:
  Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain,
  What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?"

  To this the king: "Fly, mighty warrior! fly;
  Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
  There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight,
  And Jove himself shall guard a monarch's right.
  Of all the kings (the god's distinguish'd care)
  To power superior none such hatred bear:
  Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,
  And wars and horrors are thy savage joy,
  If thou hast strength, 'twas Heaven that strength bestow'd;
  For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
  Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away;
  Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;
  I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
  Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
  Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:--but here(56)
  'Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
  Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
  My bark shall waft her to her native land;
  But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,
  Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair:
  Even in thy tent I'll seize the blooming prize,
  Thy loved Briseis with the radiant eyes.
  Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour
  Thou stood'st a rival of imperial power;
  And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known,
  That kings are subject to the gods alone."

  Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppress'd,
  His heart swell'd high, and labour'd in his breast;
  Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;
  Now fired by wrath, and now by reason cool'd:
  That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,
  Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;
  This whispers soft his vengeance to control,
  And calm the rising tempest of his soul.
  Just as in anguish of suspense he stay'd,
  While half unsheathed appear'd the glittering blade,(57)
  Minerva swift descended from above,
  Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove
  (For both the princes claim'd her equal care);
  Behind she stood, and by the golden hair
  Achilles seized; to him alone confess'd;
  A sable cloud conceal'd her from the rest.
  He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,
  Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes:

         [Illustration: MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.]

                 MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.


  "Descends Minerva, in her guardian care,
  A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear
  From Atreus' son?--Then let those eyes that view
  The daring crime, behold the vengeance too."

  "Forbear (the progeny of Jove replies)
  To calm thy fury I forsake the skies:
  Let great Achilles, to the gods resign'd,
  To reason yield the empire o'er his mind.
  By awful Juno this command is given;
  The king and you are both the care of heaven.
  The force of keen reproaches let him feel;
  But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
  For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)
  Thy injured honour has its fated hour,
  When the proud monarch shall thy arms implores
  And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
  Then let revenge no longer bear the sway;
  Command thy passions, and the gods obey."

  To her Pelides:--"With regardful ear,
  'Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.
  Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress:
  Those who revere the gods the gods will bless."
  He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
  Then in the sheath return'd the shining blade.
  The goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
  And joins the sacred senate of the skies.

  Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
  Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
  "O monster! mix'd of insolence and fear,
  Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
  When wert thou known in ambush'd fights to dare,
  Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
  'Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
  Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
  So much 'tis safer through the camp to go,
  And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
  Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
  Sent in Jove's anger on a slavish race;
  Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
  Are tamed to wrongs;--or this had been thy last.
  Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
  Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
  Which sever'd from the trunk (as I from thee)
  On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
  This sceptre, form'd by temper'd steel to prove
  An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
  From whom the power of laws and justice springs
  (Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
  By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
  Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
  When, flush'd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
  The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
  Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
  Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
  Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
  This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe."

  He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
  His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
  Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
  The raging king return'd his frowns again.

  To calm their passion with the words of age,
  Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
  Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
  Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:(58)
  Two generations now had pass'd away,
  Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
  And now the example of the third remain'd.
  All view'd with awe the venerable man;
  Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

  "What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
  To Troy's proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
  That adverse gods commit to stern debate
  The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
  Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
  Nor think your Nestor's years and wisdom vain.
  A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
  Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
  Lives there a chief to match Pirithous' fame,
  Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name;
  Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
  Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
  With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
  In early youth my hardy days I led;
  Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
  And smit with love of honourable deeds,
  Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
  Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters' gore,
  And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
  Yet these with soft persuasive arts I sway'd;
  When Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd.
  If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
  Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
  Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
  That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
  Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
  Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
  Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
  Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
  Him, awful majesty exalts above
  The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
  Let both unite with well-consenting mind,
  So shall authority with strength be join'd.
  Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles' rage;
  Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
  Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
  The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host."

  This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
  "Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But that imperious, that unconquer'd soul,
  No laws can limit, no respect control.
  Before his pride must his superiors fall;
  His word the law, and he the lord of all?
  Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
  What king can bear a rival in his sway?
  Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
  Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?"

  Here on the monarch's speech Achilles broke,
  And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
  "Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
  To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
  Should I submit to each unjust decree:--
  Command thy vassals, but command not me.
  Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doom'd
  My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
  And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
  His conquering sword in any woman's cause.
  The gods command me to forgive the past:
  But let this first invasion be the last:
  For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
  Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade."

  At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
  The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

  Achilles with Patroclus took his way
  Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
  Meantime Atrides launch'd with numerous oars
  A well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores:
  High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed,
  And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
  Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
  Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

  The host to expiate next the king prepares,
  With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
  Wash'd by the briny wave, the pious train(59)
  Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
  Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
  And bulls and goats to Phoebus' altars paid;
  The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
  And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

  The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
  Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
  To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
  Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
  "Haste to the fierce Achilles' tent (he cries),
  Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize:
  Submit he must; or if they will not part,
  Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart."

  The unwilling heralds act their lord's commands;
  Pensive they walk along the barren sands:
  Arrived, the hero in his tent they find,
  With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
  At awful distance long they silent stand,
  Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
  Decent confusion! This the godlike man
  Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

  "With leave and honour enter our abodes,
  Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!(60)
  I know your message; by constraint you came;
  Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
  Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring;
  Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
  But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
  Witness to gods above, and men below!
  But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
  (That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
  Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
  Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
  The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
  Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
  Unskill'd to judge the future by the past,
  In blood and slaughter shall repent at last."

   [Illustration: THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.]

           THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.


  Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
  She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
  Pass'd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
  And of look'd back, slow-moving o'er the strand.
  Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
  But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
  O'er the wild margin of the deep he hung,
  That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:(61)
  There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
  Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

  "O parent goddess! since in early bloom
  Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
  Sure to so short a race of glory born,
  Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
  Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;
  And ill he pays the promise of a god,
  If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,
  Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize."

  Far from the deep recesses of the main,
  Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign,
  The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;
  And like a mist she rose above the tide;
  Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,
  And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
  "Why grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He deeply sighing said: "To tell my woe
  Is but to mention what too well you know.
  From Thebe, sacred to Apollo's name(62)
  (Aetion's realm), our conquering army came,
  With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils,
  Whose just division crown'd the soldier's toils;
  But bright Chryseis, heavenly prize! was led,
  By vote selected, to the general's bed.
  The priest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain
  His beauteous daughter from the victor's chain;
  The fleet he reach'd, and, lowly bending down,
  Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown,
  Intreating all; but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings of Atreus' royal race:
  The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair;
  Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,
  The sire insulted, and his gifts denied:
  The insulted sire (his god's peculiar care)
  To Phoebus pray'd, and Phoebus heard the prayer:
  A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts
  Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.
  A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose,
  And points the crime, and thence derives the woes:
  Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
  To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
  Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm'd;
  Incensed he threaten'd, and his threats perform'd:
  The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent,
  With offer'd gifts to make the god relent;
  But now he seized Briseis' heavenly charms,
  And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms,
  Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;(63)
  And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
  But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
  To high Olympus' shining court ascend,
  Urge all the ties to former service owed,
  And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
  Oft hast thou triumph'd in the glorious boast,
  That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
  When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
  The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
  When the bright partner of his awful reign,
  The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
  The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
  Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
  Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
  (Whom gods Briareus, men Cgeon name),
  Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
  Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
  With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
  And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
  The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
  They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.(64)
  This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
  Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
  Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
  To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
  To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
  The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
  Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
  O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
  And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
  The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

  [Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.]

          THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.


  "Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
  While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
  Why have I borne thee with a mother's throes,
  To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?(65)
  So short a space the light of heaven to view!
  So short a space! and fill'd with sorrow too!
  O might a parent's careful wish prevail,
  Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
  And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
  Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
  Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'll go
  To great Olympus crown'd with fleecy snow.
  Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far
  Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
  The sire of gods and all the ethereal train,
  On the warm limits of the farthest main,
  Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace
  The feasts of Cthiopia's blameless race,(66)
  Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite,
  Returning with the twelfth revolving light.
  Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move
  The high tribunal of immortal Jove."

  The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose;
  Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose,
  And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast,
  In wild resentment for the fair he lost.

  In Chrysa's port now sage Ulysses rode;
  Beneath the deck the destined victims stow'd:
  The sails they furl'd, they lash the mast aside,
  And dropp'd their anchors, and the pinnace tied.
  Next on the shore their hecatomb they land;
  Chryseis last descending on the strand.
  Her, thus returning from the furrow'd main,
  Ulysses led to Phoebus' sacred fane;
  Where at his solemn altar, as the maid
  He gave to Chryses, thus the hero said:

  "Hail, reverend priest! to Phoebus' awful dome
  A suppliant I from great Atrides come:
  Unransom'd, here receive the spotless fair;
  Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare;
  And may thy god who scatters darts around,
  Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound."(67)

  At this, the sire embraced the maid again,
  So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.
  Then near the altar of the darting king,
  Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring;
  With water purify their hands, and take
  The sacred offering of the salted cake;
  While thus with arms devoutly raised in air,
  And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer:

  "God of the silver bow, thy ear incline,
  Whose power incircles Cilla the divine;
  Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys,
  And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguish'd rays!
  If, fired to vengeance at thy priest's request,
  Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest:
  Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe,
  And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow."

  So Chryses pray'd. Apollo heard his prayer:
  And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare;
  Between their horns the salted barley threw,
  And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:(68)
  The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide;
  The thighs, selected to the gods, divide:
  On these, in double cauls involved with art,
  The choicest morsels lay from every part.
  The priest himself before his altar stands,
  And burns the offering with his holy hands.
  Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire;
  The youth with instruments surround the fire:
  The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd,
  The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare;
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
  With pure libations they conclude the feast;
  The youths with wine the copious goblets crown'd,
  And, pleased, dispense the flowing bowls around;(69)
  With hymns divine the joyous banquet ends,
  The paeans lengthen'd till the sun descends:
  The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes prolong;
  Apollo listens, and approves the song.

  'Twas night; the chiefs beside their vessel lie,
  Till rosy morn had purpled o'er the sky:
  Then launch, and hoist the mast: indulgent gales,
  Supplied by Phoebus, fill the swelling sails;
  The milk-white canvas bellying as they blow,
  The parted ocean foams and roars below:
  Above the bounding billows swift they flew,
  Till now the Grecian camp appear'd in view.
  Far on the beach they haul their bark to land,
  (The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,)
  Then part, where stretch'd along the winding bay,
  The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.

  But raging still, amidst his navy sat
  The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate;
  Nor mix'd in combat, nor in council join'd;
  But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind:
  In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll,
  And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.

  Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light
  The gods had summon'd to the Olympian height:
  Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers,
  Leads the long order of ethereal powers.
  When, like the morning-mist in early day,
  Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea:
  And to the seats divine her flight address'd.
  There, far apart, and high above the rest,
  The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds
  His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
  Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed
  Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
  "If e'er, O father of the gods! (she said)
  My words could please thee, or my actions aid,
  Some marks of honour on my son bestow,
  And pay in glory what in life you owe.
  Fame is at least by heavenly promise due
  To life so short, and now dishonour'd too.
  Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise!
  Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
  Till the proud king and all the Achaian race
  Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace."

      [Illustration: THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.]

              THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.


  Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held
  The sacred counsels of his breast conceal'd.
  Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press'd,
  Still grasp'd his knees, and urged the dear request.
  "O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
  Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
  Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
  Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?"

  She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
  Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies:

  "What hast thou ask'd? ah, why should Jove engage
  In foreign contests and domestic rage,
  The gods' complaints, and Juno's fierce alarms,
  While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
  Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
  With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
  But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
  Witness the sacred honours of our head,
  The nod that ratifies the will divine,
  The faithful, fix'd, irrevocable sign;
  This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows--"
  He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,(70)
  Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
  The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
  High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
  And all Olympus to the centre shook.(71)

  Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
  Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.
  The shining synod of the immortals wait
  The coming god, and from their thrones of state
  Arising silent, wrapp'd in holy fear,
  Before the majesty of heaven appear.
  Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,
  All, but the god's imperious queen alone:
  Late had she view'd the silver-footed dame,
  And all her passions kindled into flame.
  "Say, artful manager of heaven (she cries),
  Who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
  Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate,
  In vain the partner of imperial state.
  What favourite goddess then those cares divides,
  Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?"

  To this the thunderer: "Seek not thou to find
  The sacred counsels of almighty mind:
  Involved in darkness likes the great decree,
  Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.
  What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know;
  The first of gods above, and men below;
  But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll
  Deep in the close recesses of my soul."

  Full on the sire the goddess of the skies
  Roll'd the large orbs of her majestic eyes,
  And thus return'd:--"Austere Saturnius, say,
  From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway?
  Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force,
  And all thy counsels take the destined course.
  But 'tis for Greece I fear: for late was seen,
  In close consult, the silver-footed queen.
  Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny,
  Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky.
  What fatal favour has the goddess won,
  To grace her fierce, inexorable son?
  Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain,
  And glut his vengeance with my people slain."

  Then thus the god: "O restless fate of pride,
  That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide;
  Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorr'd,
  Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord.
  Let this suffice: the immutable decree
  No force can shake: what is, that ought to be.
  Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand,
  But dread the power of this avenging hand:
  The united strength of all the gods above
  In vain resists the omnipotence of Jove."

                         [Illustration: VULCAN.]

                                 VULCAN.


  The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply;
  A reverent horror silenced all the sky.
  The feast disturb'd, with sorrow Vulcan saw
  His mother menaced, and the gods in awe;
  Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design,
  Thus interposed the architect divine:
  "The wretched quarrels of the mortal state
  Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate:
  Let men their days in senseless strife employ,
  We, in eternal peace and constant joy.
  Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply,
  Nor break the sacred union of the sky:
  Lest, roused to rage, he shake the bless'd abodes,
  Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods.
  If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased;
  The gracious power is willing to be pleased."

  Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound,
  The double bowl with sparkling nectar crown'd,(72)
  Which held to Juno in a cheerful way,
  "Goddess (he cried), be patient and obey.
  Dear as you are, if Jove his arm extend,
  I can but grieve, unable to defend
  What god so daring in your aid to move,
  Or lift his hand against the force of Jove?
  Once in your cause I felt his matchless might,
  Hurl'd headlong down from the ethereal height;(73)
  Toss'd all the day in rapid circles round,
  Nor till the sun descended touch'd the ground.
  Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost;
  The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;(74)

  He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,
  Which, with a smile, the white-arm'd queen received
  Then, to the rest he fill'd; and in his turn,
  Each to his lips applied the nectar'd urn,
  Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
  And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.

  Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
  In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.(75)
  Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
  With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
  Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
  Descending swift, roll'd down the rapid light:
  Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
  The shining monuments of Vulcan's art:
  Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
  And Juno slumber'd on the golden bed.

                         [Illustration: JUPITER.]

                                 JUPITER.


                 [Illustration: THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.]

                         THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.





BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.

THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.

Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful vision
to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in order to make
the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The general, who is deluded
with the hopes of taking Troy without his assistance, but fears the army
was discouraged by his absence, and the late plague, as well as by the
length of time, contrives to make trial of their disposition by a
stratagem. He first communicates his design to the princes in council,
that he would propose a return to the soldiers, and that they should put a
stop to them if the proposal was embraced. Then he assembles the whole
host, and upon moving for a return to Greece, they unanimously agree to
it, and run to prepare the ships. They are detained by the management of
Ulysses, who chastises the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is
recalled, several speeches made on the occasion, and at length the advice
of Nestor followed, which was to make a general muster of the troops, and
to divide them into their several nations, before they proceeded to
battle. This gives occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the
Greeks and Trojans, and in a large catalogue.

The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day. The scene
lies in the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards the end it
removes to Troy.

  Now pleasing sleep had seal'd each mortal eye,
  Stretch'd in the tents the Grecian leaders lie:
  The immortals slumber'd on their thrones above;
  All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.(76)
  To honour Thetis' son he bends his care,
  And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war:
  Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,
  And thus commands the vision of the night.

  "Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,(77)
  To Agamemnon's ample tent repair.
  Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
  Declare, e'en now 'tis given him to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall."

  Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
  Descends, and hovers o'er Atrides' head;
  Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
  Renown'd for wisdom, and revered for age:
  Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
  And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.

       [Illustration: JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.]

               JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.


  "Canst thou, with all a monarch's cares oppress'd,
  O Atreus' son! canst thou indulge the rest?(78)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides,
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.(79)
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
  Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
  Awake, but waking this advice approve,
  And trust the vision that descends from Jove."

  The phantom said; then vanish'd from his sight,
  Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
  A thousand schemes the monarch's mind employ;
  Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
  Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
  Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design'd,
  What mighty toils to either host remain,
  What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
  Eager he rises, and in fancy hears
  The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
  First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,
  Around him next the regal mantle threw,
  The embroider'd sandals on his feet were tied;
  The starry falchion glitter'd at his side;
  And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads,
  Unstain'd, immortal, and the gift of gods.

  Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
  Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
  The king despatch'd his heralds with commands
  To range the camp and summon all the bands:
  The gathering hosts the monarch's word obey;
  While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
  In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
  There calls a senate of the peers around:
  The assembly placed, the king of men express'd
  The counsels labouring in his artful breast.

  "Friends and confederates! with attentive ear
  Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
  Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
  A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
  Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
  The same in habit, and in mien the same.(80)
  The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
  'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides;
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
  Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

  This hear observant, and the gods obey!'
  The vision spoke, and pass'd in air away.
  Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,
  Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms.
  But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,
  Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
  To move the troops to measure back the main,
  Be mine; and yours the province to detain."

  He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
  (Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy realms obey'd,)
  "Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
  Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
  Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
  Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
  Then let us haste, obey the god's alarms,
  And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms."

  Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
  Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
  The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
  Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
  As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
  Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
  Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
  With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
  Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
  And o'er the vale descends the living cloud.(81)
  So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
  Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
  Along the region runs a deafening sound;
  Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
  Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
  And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
  Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud(82)
  The monarch's will, suspend the listening crowd.
  Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
  And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
  The king of kings his awful figure raised:
  High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
  The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
  By Vulcan form'd, from Jove to Hermes came.
  To Pelops he the immortal gift resign'd;
  The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,
  In Atreus' hand, which not with Atreus ends,
  To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;
  And now the mark of Agamemnon's reign,
  Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.(83)

  On this bright sceptre now the king reclined,
  And artful thus pronounced the speech design'd:
  "Ye sons of Mars, partake your leader's care,
  Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the war!
  Of partial Jove with justice I complain,
  And heavenly oracles believed in vain
  A safe return was promised to our toils,
  Renown'd, triumphant, and enrich'd with spoils.
  Now shameful flight alone can save the host,
  Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost.
  So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
  At whose command whole empires rise or fall:
  He shakes the feeble props of human trust,
  And towns and armies humbles to the dust
  What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage,
  Oh, lasting shame in every future age!
  Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow,
  Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.
  So small their number, that if wars were ceased,
  And Greece triumphant held a general feast,
  All rank'd by tens, whole decades when they dine
  Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.(84)
  But other forces have our hopes o'erthrown,
  And Troy prevails by armies not her own.
  Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run,
  Since first the labours of this war begun:
  Our cordage torn, decay'd our vessels lie,
  And scarce insure the wretched power to fly.
  Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall!
  Our weeping wives, our tender children call:
  Love, duty, safety, summon us away,
  'Tis nature's voice, and nature we obey,
  Our shatter'd barks may yet transport us o'er,
  Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
  Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ,
  And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy."

  His deep design unknown, the hosts approve
  Atrides' speech. The mighty numbers move.
  So roll the billows to the Icarian shore,
  From east and south when winds begin to roar,
  Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep
  The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
  And as on corn when western gusts descend,(85)
  Before the blast the lofty harvests bend:
  Thus o'er the field the moving host appears,
  With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
  The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet
  Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;
  With long-resounding cries they urge the train
  To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
  They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise,
  The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
  E'en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
  And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
  But Jove's imperial queen their flight survey'd,
  And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

  "Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
  And leave unpunish'd this perfidious race?
  Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
  In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
  And bravest chiefs, in Helen's quarrel slain,
  Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
  No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
  Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
  Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
  Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main."

  Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' height
  Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
  Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
  For prudent counsel like the gods renown'd:
  Oppress'd with generous grief the hero stood,
  Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
  "And is it thus, divine Laertes' son,
  Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun),
  Thus to their country bear their own disgrace,
  And fame eternal leave to Priam's race?
  Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,
  Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
  Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame,
  Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
  Your own resistless eloquence employ,
  And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy."

  The voice divine confess'd the warlike maid,
  Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obey'd:
  Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand
  Received the imperial sceptre of command.
  Thus graced, attention and respect to gain,
  He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train;
  Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved,
  He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.

  "Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless'd,
  By brave examples should confirm the rest.
  The monarch's will not yet reveal'd appears;
  He tries our courage, but resents our fears.
  The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke;
  Not thus the king in secret council spoke.
  Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs,
  Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings."

  But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose,
  Him with reproof he check'd or tamed with blows.
  "Be still, thou slave, and to thy betters yield;
  Unknown alike in council and in field!
  Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
  Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.
  Be silent, wretch, and think not here allow'd
  That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
  To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway;
  His are the laws, and him let all obey."(86)

  With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled,
  The loudest silenced, and the fiercest cool'd.
  Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,
  Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain.
  Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars,
  And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores;
  The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound,
  The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
  At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease,
  And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.
  Thersites only clamour'd in the throng,
  Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:
  Awed by no shame, by no respect controll'd,
  In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:
  With witty malice studious to defame,
  Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:--
  But chief he gloried with licentious style
  To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
  His figure such as might his soul proclaim;
  One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame:
  His mountain shoulders half his breast o'erspread,
  Thin hairs bestrew'd his long misshapen head.
  Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess'd,
  And much he hated all, but most the best:
  Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;
  But royal scandal his delight supreme,
  Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,
  Vex'd when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
  Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone,
  Thus with injurious taunts attack'd the throne.

  "Amidst the glories of so bright a reign,
  What moves the great Atrides to complain?
  'Tis thine whate'er the warrior's breast inflames,
  The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
  With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
  Thy tents are crowded and thy chests o'erflow.
  Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll'd,
  What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold?
  Say, shall we march with our unconquer'd powers
  (The Greeks and I) to Ilion's hostile towers,
  And bring the race of royal bastards here,
  For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
  But safer plunder thy own host supplies;
  Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader's prize?
  Or, if thy heart to generous love be led,
  Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
  Whate'er our master craves submit we must,
  Plagued with his pride, or punish'd for his lust.
  Oh women of Achaia; men no more!
  Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store
  In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.
  We may be wanted on some busy day,
  When Hector comes: so great Achilles may:
  From him he forced the prize we jointly gave,
  From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:
  And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong,
  This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long."

  Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,(87)
  In generous vengeance of the king of kings.
  With indignation sparkling in his eyes,
  He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies:

  "Peace, factious monster, born to vex the state,
  With wrangling talents form'd for foul debate:
  Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain,
  And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.
  Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host,
  The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
  Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring,
  Nor let those lips profane the name of king.
  For our return we trust the heavenly powers;
  Be that their care; to fight like men be ours.
  But grant the host with wealth the general load,
  Except detraction, what hast thou bestow'd?
  Suppose some hero should his spoils resign,
  Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine?
  Gods! let me perish on this hateful shore,
  And let these eyes behold my son no more;
  If, on thy next offence, this hand forbear
  To strip those arms thou ill deserv'st to wear,
  Expel the council where our princes meet,
  And send thee scourged and howling through the fleet."

  He said, and cowering as the dastard bends,
  The weighty sceptre on his bank descends.(88)
  On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise:
  The tears spring starting from his haggard eyes;
  Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,
  From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears;
  While to his neighbour each express'd his thought:

  "Ye gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought!
  What fruits his conduct and his courage yield!
  Great in the council, glorious in the field.
  Generous he rises in the crown's defence,
  To curb the factious tongue of insolence,
  Such just examples on offenders shown,
  Sedition silence, and assert the throne."

  'Twas thus the general voice the hero praised,
  Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
  The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
  (In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
  The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
  To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
  Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
  His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

  "Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
  With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
  Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
  Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
  Ne'er to return, was then the common cry,
  Till Troy's proud structures should in ashes lie.
  Behold them weeping for their native shore;
  What could their wives or helpless children more?
  What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
  And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
  Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
  When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
  Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
  The tedious length of nine revolving years.
  Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
  But vanquish'd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
  Expect the time to Troy's destruction given.
  And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
  What pass'd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,(89)
  And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
  Beside a fountain's sacred brink we raised
  Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
  'Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
  The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
  A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
  From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
  Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll'd,
  And curl'd around in many a winding fold;
  The topmost branch a mother-bird possess'd;
  Eight callow infants fill'd the mossy nest;
  Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung,
  Stretch'd his black jaws and crush'd the crying young;
  While hovering near, with miserable moan,
  The drooping mother wail'd her children gone.
  The mother last, as round the nest she flew,
  Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew;
  Nor long survived: to marble turn'd, he stands
  A lasting prodigy on Aulis' sands.
  Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare
  Trust in his omen, and support the war.
  For while around we gazed with wondering eyes,
  And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice,
  Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,(90)
  'Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.
  This wondrous signal Jove himself displays,
  Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
  As many birds as by the snake were slain,
  So many years the toils of Greece remain;
  But wait the tenth, for Ilion's fall decreed:'
  Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates succeed.
  Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait,
  Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate."
  He said: the shores with loud applauses sound,
  The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
  Then Nestor thus--"These vain debates forbear,
  Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
  Where now are all your high resolves at last?
  Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
  Vow'd with libations and with victims then,
  Now vanish'd like their smoke: the faith of men!
  While useless words consume the unactive hours,
  No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.
  Rise, great Atrides! and with courage sway;
  We march to war, if thou direct the way.
  But leave the few that dare resist thy laws,
  The mean deserters of the Grecian cause,
  To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares,
  And view with envy our successful wars.
  On that great day, when first the martial train,
  Big with the fate of Ilion, plough'd the main,
  Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent,
  And thunder rolling shook the firmament.
  Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife,
  Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife,
  Till Helen's woes at full revenged appear,
  And Troy's proud matrons render tear for tear.
  Before that day, if any Greek invite
  His country's troops to base, inglorious flight,
  Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,
  And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
  But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:(91)
  Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise.
  Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;
  In tribes and nations to divide thy train:
  His separate troops let every leader call,
  Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
  What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,
  Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command,
  When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known
  And what the cause of Ilion not o'erthrown;
  If fate resists, or if our arms are slow,
  If gods above prevent, or men below."

  To him the king: "How much thy years excel
  In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
  O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree
  But ten such sages as they grant in thee;
  Such wisdom soon should Priam's force destroy,
  And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!
  But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
  In fierce contention and in vain debates:
  Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws,
  By me provoked; a captive maid the cause:
  If e'er as friends we join, the Trojan wall
  Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
  But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;
  And, well refresh'd, to bloody conflict haste.
  His sharpen'd spear let every Grecian wield,
  And every Grecian fix his brazen shield,
  Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,
  And all for combat fit the rattling car.
  This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;
  No rest, no respite, till the shades descend;
  Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all:
  Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;
  Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast,
  With the huge shield each brawny arm depress'd,
  Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw,
  And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
  Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,
  Who dares to tremble on this signal day;
  That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power,
  The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour."

  The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose,
  Loud as the surges when the tempest blows,
  That dash'd on broken rocks tumultuous roar,
  And foam and thunder on the stony shore.
  Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend,
  The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend;
  With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray,
  To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.
  A steer of five years' age, large limb'd, and fed,(92)
  To Jove's high altars Agamemnon led:
  There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;
  And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
  Next came Idomeneus,(93)
  and Tydeus' son,(94)
  Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;(95)
  Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;
  And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.(96)
  The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take
  The sacred offering of the salted cake:
  When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;
  "O thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air,
  Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!
  Hear! and before the burning sun descends,
  Before the night her gloomy veil extends,
  Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires,
  Be Priam's palace sunk in Grecian fires.
  In Hector's breast be plunged this shining sword,
  And slaughter'd heroes groan around their lord!"

  Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer
  Great Jove refused, and toss'd in empty air:
  The God averse, while yet the fumes arose,
  Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes.
  Their prayers perform'd the chiefs the rite pursue,
  The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
  The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide,
  The thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
  On these, in double cauls involved with art,
  The choicest morsels lie from every part,
  From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire
  While the fat victims feed the sacred fire.
  The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd
  The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest;
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress'd,
  The generous Nestor thus the prince address'd.

  "Now bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms,
  And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms;
  Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey,
  And lead to war when heaven directs the way."

  He said; the monarch issued his commands;
  Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands
  The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide,
  In tribes and nations rank'd on either side.
  High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;
  From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes;
  The dreadful aegis, Jove's immortal shield,
  Blazed on her arm, and lighten'd all the field:
  Round the vast orb a hundred serpents roll'd,
  Form'd the bright fringe, and seem'd to burn in gold,
  With this each Grecian's manly breast she warms,
  Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,
  No more they sigh, inglorious, to return,
  But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

  As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,
  The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above;
  The fires expanding, as the winds arise,
  Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies:
  So from the polish'd arms, and brazen shields,
  A gleamy splendour flash'd along the fields.
  Not less their number than the embodied cranes,
  Or milk-white swans in Asius' watery plains.
  That, o'er the windings of Cayster's springs,(97)
  Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,
  Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds,
  Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
  Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
  The legions crowd Scamander's flowery side;(98)
  With rushing troops the plains are cover'd o'er,
  And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
  Along the river's level meads they stand,
  Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
  Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
  The wandering nation of a summer's day:
  That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
  In gather'd swarms surround the rural bowers;
  From pail to pail with busy murmur run
  The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
  So throng'd, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood
  In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
  Each leader now his scatter'd force conjoins
  In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
  Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain
  Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
  The king of kings, majestically tall,
  Towers o'er his armies, and outshines them all;
  Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads
  His subject herds, the monarch of the meads,
  Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen,
  His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;(99)
  Jove o'er his eyes celestial glories spread,
  And dawning conquest played around his head.

  Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,
  All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine!(100)
  Since earth's wide regions, heaven's umneasur'd height,
  And hell's abyss, hide nothing from your sight,
  (We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below,
  But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)
  O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame,
  Or urged by wrongs, to Troy's destruction came.
  To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,
  A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
  Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you
  The mighty labour dauntless I pursue;
  What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,
  Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.

                     THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.(101)

                         [Illustration: NEPTUNE.]

                                 NEPTUNE.


  The hardy warriors whom Boeotia bred,
  Penelius, Leitus, Prothoenor, led:
  With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,
  Equal in arms, and equal in command.
  These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields,
  And Eteon's hills, and Hyrie's watery fields,
  And Schoenos, Scholos, Graea near the main,
  And Mycalessia's ample piny plain;
  Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,
  Or Harma where Apollo's prophet fell;
  Heleon and Hyle, which the springs o'erflow;
  And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
  Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,
  Or Thespia sacred to the god of day:
  Onchestus, Neptune's celebrated groves;
  Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves;
  For flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the vine;
  Platea green, and Nysa the divine;
  And they whom Thebe's well-built walls inclose,
  Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose;
  And Arne rich, with purple harvests crown'd;
  And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost bound.
  Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys
  Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.(102)

  To these succeed Aspledon's martial train,
  Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
  Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng,
  Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
  Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair,
  Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:
  (In Actor's court as she retired to rest,
  The strength of Mars the blushing maid compress'd)
  Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,
  With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.

  The Phocians next in forty barks repair;
  Epistrophus and Schedius head the war:
  From those rich regions where Cephisus leads
  His silver current through the flowery meads;
  From Panopea, Chrysa the divine,
  Where Anemoria's stately turrets shine,
  Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
  And fair Lilaea views the rising flood.
  These, ranged in order on the floating tide,
  Close, on the left, the bold Boeotians' side.

  Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
  Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant son;
  Skill'd to direct the flying dart aright;
  Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
  Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend,
  Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;
  Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe's bands;
  And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
  And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands,
  Or in fair Tarphe's sylvan seats reside:
  In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.

  Euboea next her martial sons prepares,
  And sends the brave Abantes to the wars:
  Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way
  From Chalcis' walls, and strong Eretria;
  The Isteian fields for generous vines renown'd,
  The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground;
  Where Dios from her towers o'erlooks the plain,
  And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.
  Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair;
  Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air;
  But with protended spears in fighting fields
  Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields.
  Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands,
  Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.

  Full fifty more from Athens stem the main,
  Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain.
  (Athens the fair, where great Erectheus sway'd,
  That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
  But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
  The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.
  Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane,
  Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain;
  Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze,
  And all the tribes resound the goddess' praise.)
  No chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,
  To marshal armies in the dusty field,
  The extended wings of battle to display,
  Or close the embodied host in firm array.
  Nestor alone, improved by length of days,
  For martial conduct bore an equal praise.

  With these appear the Salaminian bands,
  Whom the gigantic Telamon commands;
  In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,
  And with the great Athenians join their force.

  Next move to war the generous Argive train,
  From high Troezene, and Maseta's plain,
  And fair Cgina circled by the main:
  Whom strong Tyrinthe's lofty walls surround,
  And Epidaure with viny harvests crown'd:
  And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show
  Their cliffs above, and ample bay below.
  These by the brave Euryalus were led,
  Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed;
  But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway:
  In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

  The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
  Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,(103)
  Fair Araethyrea, Ornia's fruitful plain,
  And Cgion, and Adrastus' ancient reign;
  And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
  And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
  Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
  And Gonoessa's spires salute the sky.
  Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
  A hundred vessels in long order stand,
  And crowded nations wait his dread command.
  High on the deck the king of men appears,
  And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
  Proud of his host, unrivall'd in his reign,
  In silent pomp he moves along the main.

  His brother follows, and to vengeance warms
  The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
  Phares and Brysia's valiant troops, and those
  Whom Lacedaemon's lofty hills inclose;
  Or Messe's towers for silver doves renown'd,
  Amyclae, Laas, Augia's happy ground,
  And those whom OEtylos' low walls contain,
  And Helos, on the margin of the main:
  These, o'er the bending ocean, Helen's cause,
  In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:
  Eager and loud from man to man he flies,
  Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;
  While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears
  The fair one's grief, and sees her falling tears.

  In ninety sail, from Pylos' sandy coast,
  Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host:
  From Amphigenia's ever-fruitful land,
  Where Cpy high, and little Pteleon stand;
  Where beauteous Arene her structures shows,
  And Thryon's walls Alpheus' streams inclose:
  And Dorion, famed for Thamyris' disgrace,
  Superior once of all the tuneful race,
  Till, vain of mortals' empty praise, he strove
  To match the seed of cloud-compelling Jove!
  Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride
  The immortal Muses in their art defied.
  The avenging Muses of the light of day
  Deprived his eyes, and snatch'd his voice away;
  No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing,
  His hand no more awaked the silver string.

  Where under high Cyllene, crown'd with wood,
  The shaded tomb of old Cpytus stood;
  From Ripe, Stratie, Tegea's bordering towns,
  The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,
  Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;
  And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove;
  Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,
  And high Enispe shook by wintry wind,
  And fair Mantinea's ever-pleasing site;
  In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite.
  Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,
  (Ancaeus' son) the mighty squadron led.
  Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon's care,
  Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear;
  The first to battle on the appointed plain,
  But new to all the dangers of the main.

  Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
  Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
  And bounded there, where o'er the valleys rose
  The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows;
  Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:
  The strength and glory of the Epean name.
  In separate squadrons these their train divide,
  Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
  One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
  (Eurytus' this, and that Teatus' son;)
  Diores sprung from Amarynceus' line;
  And great Polyxenus, of force divine.

  But those who view fair Elis o'er the seas
  From the blest islands of the Echinades,
  In forty vessels under Meges move,
  Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
  To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
  And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

  Ulysses follow'd through the watery road,
  A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
  With those whom Cephalenia's line inclosed,
  Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
  Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
  Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
  Where Cgilipa's rugged sides are seen,
  Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
  These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
  Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

  Thoas came next, Andraemon's valiant son,
  From Pleuron's walls, and chalky Calydon,
  And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,
  And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep.
  He led the warriors from the Ctolian shore,
  For now the sons of OEneus were no more!
  The glories of the mighty race were fled!
  OEneus himself, and Meleager dead!
  To Thoas' care now trust the martial train,
  His forty vessels follow through the main.

  Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,
  Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna's bands;
  And those who dwell where Rhytion's domes arise,
  Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies,
  Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs;
  Crete's hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
  These march'd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care,
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.

  Tlepolemus, the sun of Hercules,
  Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,
  From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright,
  Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
  His captive mother fierce Alcides bore
  From Ephyr's walls and Selle's winding shore,
  Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,
  And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
  The hero, when to manly years he grew,
  Alcides' uncle, old Licymnius, slew;
  For this, constrain'd to quit his native place,
  And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race,
  A fleet he built, and with a numerous train
  Of willing exiles wander'd o'er the main;
  Where, many seas and many sufferings past,
  On happy Rhodes the chief arrived at last:
  There in three tribes divides his native band,
  And rules them peaceful in a foreign land;
  Increased and prosper'd in their new abodes
  By mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods;
  With joy they saw the growing empire rise,
  And showers of wealth descending from the skies.

  Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore,
  Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore,
  Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace,
  The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;(104)
  Pelides only match'd his early charms;
  But few his troops, and small his strength in arms.

  Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain,
  Of those Calydnae's sea-girt isles contain;
  With them the youth of Nisyrus repair,
  Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair;
  Cos, where Eurypylus possess'd the sway,
  Till great Alcides made the realms obey:
  These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring,
  Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.

  Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argos' powers,
  From Alos, Alope, and Trechin's towers:
  From Phthia's spacious vales; and Hella, bless'd
  With female beauty far beyond the rest.
  Full fifty ships beneath Achilles' care,
  The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;
  Thessalians all, though various in their name;
  The same their nation, and their chief the same.
  But now inglorious, stretch'd along the shore,
  They hear the brazen voice of war no more;
  No more the foe they face in dire array:
  Close in his fleet the angry leader lay;
  Since fair Briseis from his arms was torn,
  The noblest spoil from sack'd Lyrnessus borne,
  Then, when the chief the Theban walls o'erthrew,
  And the bold sons of great Evenus slew.
  There mourn'd Achilles, plunged in depth of care,
  But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.

  To these the youth of Phylace succeed,
  Itona, famous for her fleecy breed,
  And grassy Pteleon deck'd with cheerful greens,
  The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
  Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown'd,
  And Antron's watery dens, and cavern'd ground.
  These own'd, as chief, Protesilas the brave,
  Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
  The first who boldly touch'd the Trojan shore,
  And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
  There lies, far distant from his native plain;
  Unfinish'd his proud palaces remain,
  And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
  His troops in forty ships Podarces led,
  Iphiclus' son, and brother to the dead;
  Nor he unworthy to command the host;
  Yet still they mourn'd their ancient leader lost.

  The men who Glaphyra's fair soil partake,
  Where hills incircle Boebe's lowly lake,
  Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall,
  Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall,
  In ten black ships embark'd for Ilion's shore,
  With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore:
  All Pelias' race Alceste far outshined,
  The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,

  The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields,
  Olizon's rocks, or Meliboea's fields,
  With Philoctetes sail'd whose matchless art
  From the tough bow directs the feather'd dart.
  Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row,
  Skill'd in his science of the dart and bow.
  But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,
  A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound;
  There groan'd the chief in agonizing pain,
  Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
  His forces Medon led from Lemnos' shore,
  Oileus' son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.

  The OEchalian race, in those high towers contain'd
  Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reign'd,
  Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,
  Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,
  In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide,
  Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
  To these his skill their parent-god imparts,
  Divine professors of the healing arts.

  The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands
  In forty barks Eurypylus commands.
  Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow,
  And where Hyperia's silver fountains flow.
  Thy troops, Argissa, Polypoetes leads,
  And Eleon, shelter'd by Olympus' shades,
  Gyrtone's warriors; and where Orthe lies,
  And Oloosson's chalky cliffs arise.
  Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race,
  The fruit of fair Hippodame's embrace,
  (That day, when hurl'd from Pelion's cloudy head,
  To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)
  With Polypoetes join'd in equal sway
  Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey.

  In twenty sail the bold Perrhaebians came
  From Cyphus, Guneus was their leader's name.
  With these the Enians join'd, and those who freeze
  Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees;
  Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
  And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;
  Yet o'er the silvery surface pure they flow,
  The sacred stream unmix'd with streams below,
  Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes
  Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!

  Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
  (Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon's blood;)
  Who dwell where Pelion, crown'd with piny boughs,
  Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;
  Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus stray'd:
  (The region stretch'd beneath his mighty shade:)
  In forty sable barks they stemm'd the main;
  Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.

  Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
  Who bravest fought, or rein'd the noblest steeds?
  Eumelus' mares were foremost in the chase,
  As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race;
  Bred where Pieria's fruitful fountains flow,
  And train'd by him who bears the silver bow.
  Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame,
  Their height, their colour, and their age the same;
  O'er fields of death they whirl the rapid car,
  And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
  Ajax in arms the first renown acquired,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:
  (His was the strength that mortal might exceeds,
  And his the unrivall'd race of heavenly steeds:)
  But Thetis' son now shines in arms no more;
  His troops, neglected on the sandy shore.
  In empty air their sportive javelins throw,
  Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow:
  Unstain'd with blood his cover'd chariots stand;
  The immortal coursers graze along the strand;
  But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored,
  And, wandering o'er the camp, required their lord.

  Now, like a deluge, covering all around,
  The shining armies sweep along the ground;
  Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise,
  Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies.
  Earth groan'd beneath them; as when angry Jove
  Hurls down the forky lightning from above,
  On Arime when he the thunder throws,
  And fires Typhoeus with redoubled blows,
  Where Typhon, press'd beneath the burning load,
  Still feels the fury of the avenging god.

  But various Iris, Jove's commands to bear,
  Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air;
  In Priam's porch the Trojan chiefs she found,
  The old consulting, and the youths around.
  Polites' shape, the monarch's son, she chose,
  Who from Csetes' tomb observed the foes,(105)
  High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay
  The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.
  In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring
  The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.

  "Cease to consult, the time for action calls;
  War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
  Assembled armies oft have I beheld;
  But ne'er till now such numbers charged a field:
  Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,
  The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
  Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,
  Assemble all the united bands of Troy;
  In just array let every leader call
  The foreign troops: this day demands them all!"

  The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;
  The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train,
  Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,
  Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground:
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.

  Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands
  A rising mount, the work of human hands;
  (This for Myrinne's tomb the immortals know,
  Though call'd Bateia in the world below;)
  Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,
  The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.

  The godlike Hector, high above the rest,
  Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest:
  In throngs around his native bands repair,
  And groves of lances glitter in the air.

  Divine Cneas brings the Dardan race,
  Anchises' son, by Venus' stolen embrace,
  Born in the shades of Ida's secret grove;
  (A mortal mixing with the queen of love;)
  Archilochus and Acamas divide
  The warrior's toils, and combat by his side.

  Who fair Zeleia's wealthy valleys till,(106)
  Fast by the foot of Ida's sacred hill,
  Or drink, Csepus, of thy sable flood,
  Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood;
  To whom his art Apollo deign'd to show,
  Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.

  From rich Apaesus and Adrestia's towers,
  High Teree's summits, and Pityea's bowers;
  From these the congregated troops obey
  Young Amphius and Adrastus' equal sway;
  Old Merops' sons; whom, skill'd in fates to come,
  The sire forewarn'd, and prophesied their doom:
  Fate urged them on! the sire forewarn'd in vain,
  They rush'd to war, and perish'd on the plain.

  From Practius' stream, Percote's pasture lands,
  And Sestos and Abydos' neighbouring strands,
  From great Arisba's walls and Selle's coast,
  Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host:
  High on his car he shakes the flowing reins,
  His fiery coursers thunder o'er the plains.

  The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown'd,
  March from Larissa's ever-fertile ground:
  In equal arms their brother leaders shine,
  Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.

  Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,
  In dread array, from Thracia's wintry coasts;
  Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,
  And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.

  With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
  Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.

  Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend,
  Skill'd in the fight their crooked bows to bend;
  From Axius' ample bed he leads them on,
  Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
  Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floating region fills.

  The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
  Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
  Where Erythinus' rising cliffs are seen,
  Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
  And where Cgialus and Cromna lie,
  And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
  And where Parthenius, roll'd through banks of flowers,
  Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

  Here march'd in arms the Halizonian band,
  Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
  From those far regions where the sun refines
  The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

  There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
  And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
  For stern Achilles lopp'd his sacred head,
  Roll'd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

  Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
  The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

  Of those who round Maeonia's realms reside,
  Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
  Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
  Born on the banks of Gyges' silent lake.
  There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
  High Mycale, and Latmos' shady brows,
  And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
  With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.(107)
  Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
  Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
  Who, trick'd with gold, and glittering on his car,
  Rode like a woman to the field of war.
  Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
  The river swept him to the briny main:
  There whelm'd with waves the gaudy warrior lies
  The valiant victor seized the golden prize.

  The forces last in fair array succeed,
  Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead
  The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields,
  Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields.





BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.

THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.

The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon between
Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the determination
of the war. Iris is sent to call Helen to behold the fight. She leads her
to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his counsellers observing the
Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom Helen gives an account of the
chief of them. The kings on either part take the solemn oath for the
conditions of the combat. The duel ensues; wherein Paris being overcome,
he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus, and transported to his apartment.
She then calls Helen from the walls, and brings the lovers together.
Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians, demands the restoration of Helen,
and the performance of the articles.

The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book. The
scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and sometimes in Troy
itself.

  Thus by their leaders' care each martial band
  Moves into ranks, and stretches o'er the land.
  With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar,
  Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war
  So when inclement winters vex the plain
  With piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain,
  To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly,(108)
  With noise, and order, through the midway sky;
  To pigmy nations wounds and death they bring,
  And all the war descends upon the wing,
  But silent, breathing rage, resolved and skill'd(109)
  By mutual aids to fix a doubtful field,
  Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust around
  Darkening arises from the labour'd ground.
  Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds
  A night of vapours round the mountain heads,
  Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade,
  To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade;
  While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey,
  Lost and confused amidst the thicken'd day:
  So wrapp'd in gathering dust, the Grecian train,
  A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.

  Now front to front the hostile armies stand,
  Eager of fight, and only wait command;
  When, to the van, before the sons of fame
  Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
  In form a god! the panther's speckled hide
  Flow'd o'er his armour with an easy pride:
  His bended bow across his shoulders flung,
  His sword beside him negligently hung;
  Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,
  And dared the bravest of the Grecian race.

  As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain,
  He boldly stalk'd, the foremost on the plain,
  Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
  With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:
  So joys a lion, if the branching deer,
  Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;
  Eager he seizes and devours the slain,
  Press'd by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
  Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound,
  In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground
  From his high chariot: him, approaching near,
  The beauteous champion views with marks of fear,
  Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,
  And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
  As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees(110)
  Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees,
  Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright
  And all confused precipitates his flight:
  So from the king the shining warrior flies,
  And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.

  As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
  He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:
  "Unhappy Paris! but to women brave!(111)
  So fairly form'd, and only to deceive!
  Oh, hadst thou died when first thou saw'st the light,
  Or died at least before thy nuptial rite!
  A better fate than vainly thus to boast,
  And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host.
  Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
  Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
  Thy figure promised with a martial air,
  But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
  In former days, in all thy gallant pride,
  When thy tall ships triumphant stemm'd the tide,
  When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,
  And crowds stood wondering at the passing show,
  Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien,
  You met the approaches of the Spartan queen,
  Thus from her realm convey'd the beauteous prize,
  And both her warlike lords outshined in Helen's eyes?
  This deed, thy foes' delight, thy own disgrace,
  Thy father's grief, and ruin of thy race;
  This deed recalls thee to the proffer'd fight;
  Or hast thou injured whom thou dar'st not right?
  Soon to thy cost the field would make thee know
  Thou keep'st the consort of a braver foe.
  Thy graceful form instilling soft desire,
  Thy curling tresses, and thy silver lyre,
  Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust,
  When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust:
  Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow
  Crush the dire author of his country's woe."

  His silence here, with blushes, Paris breaks:
  "'Tis just, my brother, what your anger speaks:
  But who like thee can boast a soul sedate,
  So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate?
  Thy force, like steel, a temper'd hardness shows,
  Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows,
  Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain,
  With falling woods to strew the wasted plain.
  Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms
  With which a lover golden Venus arms;
  Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,
  No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow.
  Yet, would'st thou have the proffer'd combat stand,
  The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand;
  Then let a midway space our hosts divide,
  And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried:
  By Paris there the Spartan king be fought,
  For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought;
  And who his rival can in arms subdue,
  His be the fair, and his the treasure too.
  Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease,
  And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace;
  Thus may the Greeks review their native shore,
  Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

  He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy,
  Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
  Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe
  Advanced with steps majestically slow:
  While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour
  Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower.

  Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried:
  "Forbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside:
  A parley Hector asks, a message bears;
  We know him by the various plume he wears."
  Awed by his high command the Greeks attend,
  The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.

  While from the centre Hector rolls his eyes
  On either host, and thus to both applies:
  "Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
  What Paris, author of the war, demands.
  Your shining swords within the sheath restrain,
  And pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
  Here in the midst, in either army's sight,
  He dares the Spartan king to single fight;
  And wills that Helen and the ravish'd spoil,
  That caused the contest, shall reward the toil.
  Let these the brave triumphant victor grace,
  And different nations part in leagues of peace."

  He spoke: in still suspense on either side
  Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied:

  "Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right
  A world engages in the toils of fight.
  To me the labour of the field resign;
  Me Paris injured; all the war be mine.
  Fall he that must, beneath his rival's arms;
  And live the rest, secure of future harms.
  Two lambs, devoted by your country's rite,
  To earth a sable, to the sun a white,
  Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring
  Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
  Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,
  And add the sanction of considerate age;
  His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,
  And youth itself an empty wavering state;
  Cool age advances, venerably wise,
  Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes;
  Sees what befell, and what may yet befall,
  Concludes from both, and best provides for all.

  The nations hear with rising hopes possess'd,
  And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
  Within the lines they drew their steeds around,
  And from their chariots issued on the ground;
  Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,
  Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
  On either side the meeting hosts are seen
  With lances fix'd, and close the space between.
  Two heralds now, despatch'd to Troy, invite
  The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.

  Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring
  The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.

  Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies
  The various goddess of the rainbow flies:
  (Like fair Laodice in form and face,
  The loveliest nymph of Priam's royal race:)
  Her in the palace, at her loom she found;
  The golden web her own sad story crown'd,
  The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize)
  And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
  To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Approach, and view the wondrous scene below!(112)
  Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,
  So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,
  Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;
  Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
  Paris alone and Sparta's king advance,
  In single fight to toss the beamy lance;
  Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries,
  Thy love the motive, and thy charms the prize."

  This said, the many-coloured maid inspires
  Her husband's love, and wakes her former fires;
  Her country, parents, all that once were dear,
  Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear,
  O'er her fair face a snowy veil she threw,
  And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew.
  Her handmaids, Clymene and Cthra, wait
  Her silent footsteps to the Scaean gate.

  There sat the seniors of the Trojan race:
  (Old Priam's chiefs, and most in Priam's grace,)
  The king the first; Thymoetes at his side;
  Lampus and Clytius, long in council tried;
  Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong;
  And next, the wisest of the reverend throng,
  Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,
  Lean'd on the walls and bask'd before the sun:
  Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage,
  But wise through time, and narrative with age,
  In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice,
  A bloodless race, that send a feeble voice.
  These, when the Spartan queen approach'd the tower,
  In secret own'd resistless beauty's power:
  They cried, "No wonder such celestial charms(113)
  For nine long years have set the world in arms;
  What winning graces! what majestic mien!
  She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen!
  Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face,
  And from destruction save the Trojan race."

  The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
  "Approach, my child, and grace thy father's side.
  See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,
  The friends and kindred of thy former years.
  No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
  Not thou, but Heaven's disposing will, the cause
  The gods these armies and this force employ,
  The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
  But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he
  (Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)
  Around whose brow such martial graces shine,
  So tall, so awful, and almost divine!
  Though some of larger stature tread the green,
  None match his grandeur and exalted mien:
  He seems a monarch, and his country's pride."
  Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied:

  "Before thy presence, father, I appear,
  With conscious shame and reverential fear.
  Ah! had I died, ere to these walk I fled,
  False to my country, and my nuptial bed;
  My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind,
  False to them all, to Paris only kind!
  For this I mourn, till grief or dire disease
  Shall waste the form whose fault it was to please!
  The king of kings, Atrides, you survey,
  Great in the war, and great in arts of sway:
  My brother once, before my days of shame!
  And oh! that still he bore a brother's name!"

  With wonder Priam view'd the godlike man,
  Extoll'd the happy prince, and thus began:
  "O bless'd Atrides! born to prosperous fate,
  Successful monarch of a mighty state!
  How vast thy empire! Of your matchless train
  What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
  In Phrygia once were gallant armies known,
  In ancient time, when Otreus fill'd the throne,
  When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse,
  And I, to join them, raised the Trojan force:
  Against the manlike Amazons we stood,(114)
  And Sangar's stream ran purple with their blood.
  But far inferior those, in martial grace,
  And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race."

  This said, once more he view'd the warrior train;
  "What's he, whose arms lie scatter'd on the plain?
  Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread,
  Though great Atrides overtops his head.
  Nor yet appear his care and conduct small;
  From rank to rank he moves, and orders all.
  The stately ram thus measures o'er the ground,
  And, master of the flock, surveys them round."

  Then Helen thus: "Whom your discerning eyes
  Have singled out, is Ithacus the wise;
  A barren island boasts his glorious birth;
  His fame for wisdom fills the spacious earth."

  Antenor took the word, and thus began:(115)
  "Myself, O king! have seen that wondrous man
  When, trusting Jove and hospitable laws,
  To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause;
  (Great Menelaus urged the same request;)
  My house was honour'd with each royal guest:
  I knew their persons, and admired their parts,
  Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts.
  Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;
  Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
  When Atreus' son harangued the listening train,
  Just was his sense, and his expression plain,
  His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;
  He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
  But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,(116)
  His modest eyes he fix'd upon the ground;
  As one unskill'd or dumb, he seem'd to stand,
  Nor raised his head, nor stretch'd his sceptred hand;
  But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
  Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,(117)
  The copious accents fall, with easy art;
  Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
  Wondering we hear, and fix'd in deep surprise,
  Our ears refute the censure of our eyes."

  The king then ask'd (as yet the camp he view'd)
  "What chief is that, with giant strength endued,
  Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,
  And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
  "Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,)
  Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
  See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
  Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers,
  Great as a god! I saw him once before,
  With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
  The rest I know, and could in order name;
  All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.
  Yet two are wanting of the numerous train,
  Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
  Castor and Pollux, first in martial force,
  One bold on foot, and one renown'd for horse.
  My brothers these; the same our native shore,
  One house contain'd us, as one mother bore.
  Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,
  For distant Troy refused to sail the seas;
  Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,
  Ashamed to combat in their sister's cause."

  So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers' doom;(118)
  Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;
  Adorn'd with honours in their native shore,
  Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.

  Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town.
  Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
  Idaeus' arms the golden goblets press'd,(119)
  Who thus the venerable king address'd:
  "Arise, O father of the Trojan state!
  The nations call, thy joyful people wait
  To seal the truce, and end the dire debate.
  Paris, thy son, and Sparta's king advance,
  In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;
  And who his rival shall in arms subdue,
  His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
  Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease,
  And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace:
  So shall the Greeks review their native shore,
  Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

  With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepare
  To join his milk-white coursers to the car;
  He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side;
  The gentle steeds through Scaea's gates they guide:(120)
  Next from the car descending on the plain,
  Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train,
  Slow they proceed: the sage Ulysses then
  Arose, and with him rose the king of men.
  On either side a sacred herald stands,
  The wine they mix, and on each monarch's hands
  Pour the full urn; then draws the Grecian lord
  His cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword;
  From the sign'd victims crops the curling hair;(121)
  The heralds part it, and the princes share;
  Then loudly thus before the attentive bands
  He calls the gods, and spreads his lifted hands:

  "O first and greatest power! whom all obey,
  Who high on Ida's holy mountain sway,
  Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that roll
  From east to west, and view from pole to pole!
  Thou mother Earth! and all ye living floods!
  Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods,
  Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
  For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
  Hear, and be witness. If, by Paris slain,
  Great Menelaus press the fatal plain;
  The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep,
  And Greece returning plough the watery deep.
  If by my brother's lance the Trojan bleed,
  Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed:
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And every age record the signal day.
  This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,
  Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field."

  With that the chief the tender victims slew,
  And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw;
  The vital spirit issued at the wound,
  And left the members quivering on the ground.
  From the same urn they drink the mingled wine,
  And add libations to the powers divine.
  While thus their prayers united mount the sky,
  "Hear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high!
  And may their blood, who first the league confound,
  Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground;
  May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust,
  And all their lust be scatter'd as the dust!"
  Thus either host their imprecations join'd,
  Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind.

  The rites now finish'd, reverend Priam rose,
  And thus express'd a heart o'ercharged with woes:
  "Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage,
  But spare the weakness of my feeble age:
  In yonder walls that object let me shun,
  Nor view the danger of so dear a son.
  Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall,
  Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all."

  This said, the hoary king no longer stay'd,
  But on his car the slaughter'd victims laid:
  Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide,
  And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.

  Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose
  The lists of combat, and the ground inclose:
  Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare,
  Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air.
  The people pray with elevated hands,
  And words like these are heard through all the bands:
  "Immortal Jove, high Heaven's superior lord,
  On lofty Ida's holy mount adored!
  Whoe'er involved us in this dire debate,
  O give that author of the war to fate
  And shades eternal! let division cease,
  And joyful nations join in leagues of peace."

  With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn
  The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn.
  Then, Paris, thine leap'd forth; by fatal chance
  Ordain'd the first to whirl the weighty lance.
  Both armies sat the combat to survey.
  Beside each chief his azure armour lay,
  And round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
  The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight,
  In gilded arms magnificently bright:
  The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around,
  With flowers adorn'd, with silver buckles bound:
  Lycaon's corslet his fair body dress'd,
  Braced in and fitted to his softer breast;
  A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
  Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
  His youthful face a polish'd helm o'erspread;
  The waving horse-hair nodded on his head:
  His figured shield, a shining orb, he takes,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes.
  With equal speed and fired by equal charms,
  The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.

  Now round the lists the admiring armies stand,
  With javelins fix'd, the Greek and Trojan band.
  Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,
  All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
  The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;
  Full on Atrides' ringing shield it flew,
  Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound(122)
  Leap'd from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.
  Atrides then his massy lance prepares,
  In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:

  "Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust,
  And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:
  Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause,
  Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
  Let this example future times reclaim,
  And guard from wrong fair friendship's holy name."
  Be said, and poised in air the javelin sent,
  Through Paris' shield the forceful weapon went,
  His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
  Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
  But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
  Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
  The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
  Broke short: the fragments glitter'd on the sand.
  The raging warrior to the spacious skies
  Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
  "Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
  And is it thus the gods assist the just?
  When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
  The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies."
  Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
  (Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
  Struggling he followed, while the embroider'd thong
  That tied his helmet, dragg'd the chief along.
  Then had his ruin crown'd Atrides' joy,
  But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
  Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
  And left an empty helmet in his hand.
  The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
  The Greeks with smiles the polish'd trophy view.
  Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart,
  In thirst of vengeance, at his rival's heart;
  The queen of love her favour'd champion shrouds
  (For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
  Raised from the field the panting youth she led,
  And gently laid him on the bridal bed,
  With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,
  And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews.
  Meantime the brightest of the female kind,
  The matchless Helen, o'er the walls reclined;
  To her, beset with Trojan beauties, came,
  In borrow'd form, the laughter-loving dame.
  (She seem'd an ancient maid, well-skill'd to cull
  The snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.)
  The goddess softly shook her silken vest,
  That shed perfumes, and whispering thus address'd:

[Illustration: VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.]

        VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.


  "Haste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,
  Safe from the fight, in yonder lofty walls,
  Fair as a god; with odours round him spread,
  He lies, and waits thee on the well-known bed;
  Not like a warrior parted from the foe,
  But some gay dancer in the public show."

  She spoke, and Helen's secret soul was moved;
  She scorn'd the champion, but the man she loved.
  Fair Venus' neck, her eyes that sparkled fire,
  And breast, reveal'd the queen of soft desire.(123)
  Struck with her presence, straight the lively red
  Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said:
  "Then is it still thy pleasure to deceive?
  And woman's frailty always to believe!
  Say, to new nations must I cross the main,
  Or carry wars to some soft Asian plain?
  For whom must Helen break her second vow?
  What other Paris is thy darling now?
  Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,)
  An odious conquest and a captive wife,
  Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear
  My absence ill, let Venus ease his care.
  A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
  Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state,
  Be fix'd for ever to the Trojan shore,
  His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more.
  For me, to lawless love no longer led,
  I scorn the coward, and detest his bed;
  Else should I merit everlasting shame,
  And keen reproach, from every Phrygian dame:
  Ill suits it now the joys of love to know,
  Too deep my anguish, and too wild my woe."

             [Illustration: VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.]

                     VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.


  Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies:
  "Obey the power from whom thy glories rise:
  Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly,
  Fade from thy cheek, and languish in thy eye.
  Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more
  The world's aversion, than their love before;
  Now the bright prize for which mankind engage,
  Than, the sad victim, of the public rage."

  At this, the fairest of her sex obey'd,
  And veil'd her blushes in a silken shade;
  Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves,
  Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
  Arrived, and enter'd at the palace gate,
  The maids officious round their mistress wait;
  Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend;
  The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.
  Full in her Paris' sight, the queen of love
  Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove;
  Where, as he view'd her charms, she turn'd away
  Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say:

  "Is this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame,
  Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
  O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword
  Of that brave man whom once I call'd my lord!
  The boaster Paris oft desired the day
  With Sparta's king to meet in single fray:
  Go now, once more thy rival's rage excite,
  Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:
  Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskill'd
  Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field."

  The prince replies: "Ah cease, divinely fair,
  Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
  This day the foe prevail'd by Pallas' power:
  We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
  There want not gods to favour us above;
  But let the business of our life be love:
  These softer moments let delights employ,
  And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
  Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's shore
  My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
  When first entranced in Cranae's isle I lay,(124)
  Mix'd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!"
  Thus having spoke, the enamour'd Phrygian boy
  Rush'd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
  Him Helen follow'd slow with bashful charms,
  And clasp'd the blooming hero in her arms.

  While these to love's delicious rapture yield,
  The stern Atrides rages round the field:
  So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
  Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
  But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
  Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
  The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
  Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
  Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crown'd,
  Our brother's arms the just success have found:
  Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor'd,
  Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And age to age record this signal day."

  He ceased; his army's loud applauses rise,
  And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.

                          [Illustration: VENUS.]

                                  VENUS.


             [Illustration: Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".]

                     Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".





BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.

THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE.

The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree upon
the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break the truce.
She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is wounded, but
cured by Machaon. In the meantime some of the Trojan troops attack the
Greeks. Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts of a good general; he
reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some by praises and others by
reproof. Nestor is particularly celebrated for his military discipline.
The battle joins, and great numbers are slain on both sides.

The same day continues through this as through the last book (as it does
also through the two following, and almost to the end of the seventh
book). The scene is wholly in the field before Troy.

  And now Olympus' shining gates unfold;
  The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold:
  Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine,
  The golden goblet crowns with purple wine:
  While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ
  Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy.

  When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia's spleen,
  Thus waked the fury of his partial queen,
  "Two powers divine the son of Atreus aid,
  Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;(125)
  But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far,
  The tame spectators of his deeds of war.
  Not thus fair Venus helps her favour'd knight,
  The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight,
  Each danger wards, and constant in her care,
  Saves in the moment of the last despair.
  Her act has rescued Paris' forfeit life,
  Though great Atrides gain'd the glorious strife.
  Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waits
  To crown this deed, and finish all the fates!
  Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare,
  Or rouse the furies, and awake the war?
  Yet, would the gods for human good provide,
  Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride,
  Still Priam's walls in peaceful honours grow,
  And through his gates the crowding nations flow."

  Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged,
  And queen of war, in close consult engaged:
  Apart they sit, their deep designs employ,
  And meditate the future woes of Troy.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath suppress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of passion, broke
  Her sullen silence, and with fury spoke:

                 [Illustration: THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.]

                         THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.


  "Shall then, O tyrant of the ethereal reign!
  My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?
  Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms,
  Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
  To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore;
  The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.
  At length ripe vengeance o'er their heads impends,
  But Jove himself the faithless race defends.
  Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust,
  Not all the gods are partial and unjust."

  The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,
  Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies:
  "Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate
  To Phrygia's monarch, and the Phrygian state!
  What high offence has fired the wife of Jove?
  Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,
  That Troy, and Troy's whole race thou wouldst confound,
  And yon fair structures level with the ground!
  Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,
  Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire!
  Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,
  Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore:
  To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,
  Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
  So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,(126)
  When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.
  But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate
  On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate;
  Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,
  Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
  For know, of all the numerous towns that rise
  Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies,
  Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,
  None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
  No mortals merit more distinguish'd grace
  Than godlike Priam, or than Priam's race.
  Still to our name their hecatombs expire,
  And altars blaze with unextinguish'd fire."

  At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes,
  Then on the Thunderer fix'd them, and replies:
  "Three towns are Juno's on the Grecian plains,
  More dear than all the extended earth contains,
  Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;(127)

  These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:
  'Tis not in me the vengeance to remove;
  The crime's sufficient that they share my love.
  Of power superior why should I complain?
  Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
  Yet some distinction Juno might require,
  Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire,
  A goddess born, to share the realms above,
  And styled the consort of the thundering Jove;
  Nor thou a wife and sister's right deny;(128)
  Let both consent, and both by terms comply;
  So shall the gods our joint decrees obey,
  And heaven shall act as we direct the way.
  See ready Pallas waits thy high commands
  To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;
  Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease,
  And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace."

  The sire of men and monarch of the sky
  The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
  Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ
  To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
  Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight,
  And shot like lightning from Olympus' height.
  As the red comet, from Saturnius sent
  To fright the nations with a dire portent,
  (A fatal sign to armies on the plain,
  Or trembling sailors on the wintry main,)
  With sweeping glories glides along in air,
  And shakes the sparkles from its blazing hair:(129)
  Between both armies thus, in open sight
  Shot the bright goddess in a trail of light,
  With eyes erect the gazing hosts admire
  The power descending, and the heavens on fire!
  "The gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent,
  And fate now labours with some vast event:
  Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares;
  Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars."

  They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng,
  (In shape a mortal,) pass'd disguised along.
  Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent,
  Who from Antenor traced his high descent.
  Amidst the ranks Lycaon's son she found,
  The warlike Pandarus, for strength renown'd;
  Whose squadrons, led from black Csepus' flood,(130)
  With flaming shields in martial circle stood.
  To him the goddess: "Phrygian! canst thou hear
  A well-timed counsel with a willing ear?
  What praise were thine, couldst thou direct thy dart,
  Amidst his triumph, to the Spartan's heart?
  What gifts from Troy, from Paris wouldst thou gain,
  Thy country's foe, the Grecian glory slain?
  Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed,
  Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed!
  But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow
  To Lycian Phoebus with the silver bow,
  And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay,
  On Zelia's altars, to the god of day."(131)

  He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,
  His polish'd bow with hasty rashness seized.
  'Twas form'd of horn, and smooth'd with artful toil:
  A mountain goat resign'd the shining spoil.
  Who pierced long since beneath his arrows bled;
  The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead,
  And sixteen palms his brow's large honours spread:
  The workmen join'd, and shaped the bended horns,
  And beaten gold each taper point adorns.
  This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends,
  Screen'd by the shields of his surrounding friends:
  There meditates the mark; and couching low,
  Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
  One from a hundred feather'd deaths he chose,
  Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
  Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
  Apollo's altars in his native town.

  Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
  Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
  Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
  Till the barb'd points approach the circling bow;
  The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
  Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

  But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
  The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
  Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
  Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
  So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
  The watchful mother wafts the envenom'd fly.
  Just where his belt with golden buckles join'd,
  Where linen folds the double corslet lined,
  She turn'd the shaft, which, hissing from above,
  Pass'd the broad belt, and through the corslet drove;
  The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,
  And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore.
  As when some stately trappings are decreed
  To grace a monarch on his bounding steed,
  A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred,
  Stains the pure ivory with a lively red;
  With equal lustre various colours vie,
  The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:
  So great Atrides! show'd thy sacred blood,
  As down thy snowy thigh distill'd the streaming flood.
  With horror seized, the king of men descried
  The shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing tide:
  Nor less the Spartan fear'd, before he found
  The shining barb appear above the wound,
  Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast,
  The royal brother thus his grief express'd,
  And grasp'd his hand; while all the Greeks around
  With answering sighs return'd the plaintive sound.

  "Oh, dear as life! did I for this agree
  The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
  Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train,
  To fight for Greece, and conquer, to be slain!
  The race of Trojans in thy ruin join,
  And faith is scorn'd by all the perjured line.
  Not thus our vows, confirm'd with wine and gore,
  Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore,
  Shall all be vain: when Heaven's revenge is slow,
  Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.
  The day shall come, that great avenging day,
  When Troy's proud glories in the dust shall lay,
  When Priam's powers and Priam's self shall fall,
  And one prodigious ruin swallow all.
  I see the god, already, from the pole
  Bare his red arm, and bid the thunder roll;
  I see the Eternal all his fury shed,
  And shake his aegis o'er their guilty head.
  Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait;
  But thou, alas! deserv'st a happier fate.
  Still must I mourn the period of thy days,
  And only mourn, without my share of praise?
  Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more
  Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore;
  Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost,
  Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast;
  While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries,
  (And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,)
  'Such are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings,
  And such the conquest of her king of kings!
  Lo his proud vessels scatter'd o'er the main,
  And unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.'
  Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
  O'erwhelm me, earth! and hide a monarch's shame."

  He said: a leader's and a brother's fears
  Possess his soul, which thus the Spartan cheers:
  "Let not thy words the warmth of Greece abate;
  The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate:
  Stiff with the rich embroider'd work around,
  My varied belt repell'd the flying wound."

  To whom the king: "My brother and my friend,
  Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!
  Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art
  May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
  Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring
  His speedy succour to the Spartan king;
  Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),
  The Grecian's sorrow, and the Dardan's joy."

  With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
  Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes,
  And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands(132)
  In arms incircled with his native bands.
  Then thus: "Machaon, to the king repair,
  His wounded brother claims thy timely care;
  Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
  A grief to us, a triumph to the foe."

  The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man
  Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
  The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
  And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
  Where to the steely point the reed was join'd,
  The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
  Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
  He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
  Then suck'd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,(133)
  Which Chiron gave, and Csculapius used.

  While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
  The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
  Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
  Once more the fields are fill'd with dire alarms.
  Nor had you seen the king of men appear
  Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
  But fond of glory, with severe delight,
  His beating bosom claim'd the rising fight.
  No longer with his warlike steeds he stay'd,
  Or press'd the car with polish'd brass inlaid
  But left Eurymedon the reins to guide;
  The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
  On foot through all the martial ranks he moves
  And these encourages, and those reproves.
  "Brave men!" he cries, (to such who boldly dare
  Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war),
  "Your ancient valour on the foes approve;
  Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
  'Tis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread,
  Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;
  Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains,
  And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains."

  Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;
  Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires:
  "Shame to your country, scandal of your kind;
  Born to the fate ye well deserve to find!
  Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,
  Prepared for flight, but doom'd to fly in vain?
  Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer
  Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
  Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire,
  Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire?
  Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase,
  To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?"

  This said, he stalk'd with ample strides along,
  To Crete's brave monarch and his martial throng;
  High at their head he saw the chief appear,
  And bold Meriones excite the rear.
  At this the king his generous joy express'd,
  And clasp'd the warrior to his armed breast.
  "Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe
  To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow?
  To thee the foremost honours are decreed,
  First in the fight and every graceful deed.
  For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls
  Restore our blood, and raise the warriors' souls,
  Though all the rest with stated rules we bound,
  Unmix'd, unmeasured, are thy goblets crown'd.
  Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name;
  Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame."
  To whom the Cretan thus his speech address'd:
  "Secure of me, O king! exhort the rest.
  Fix'd to thy side, in every toil I share,
  Thy firm associate in the day of war.
  But let the signal be this moment given;
  To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven.
  The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,
  And chains or death avenge the impious deed."

  Charm'd with this heat, the king his course pursues,
  And next the troops of either Ajax views:
  In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,
  A cloud of heroes blacken'd all the ground.
  Thus from the lofty promontory's brow
  A swain surveys the gathering storm below;
  Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise,
  Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,
  Till black as night the swelling tempest shows,
  The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:
  He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock
  To the close covert of an arching rock.

  Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,
  With spears erect, a moving iron wood:
  A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,
  And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.

  "O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,
  Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain,
  (Exclaim'd the king), who raise your eager bands
  With great examples, more than loud commands.
  Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest
  Such souls as burn in your exalted breast,
  Soon should our arms with just success be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie smoking on the ground."

  Then to the next the general bends his course;
  (His heart exults, and glories in his force);
  There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,
  And with inspiring eloquence commands;
  With strictest order sets his train in arms,
  The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.
  Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait,
  Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
  The horse and chariots to the front assign'd,
  The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;
  The middle space suspected troops supply,
  Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;
  He gives command to "curb the fiery steed,
  Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks exceed:
  Before the rest let none too rashly ride;
  No strength nor skill, but just in time, be tried:
  The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein,
  But fight, or fall; a firm embodied train.
  He whom the fortune of the field shall cast
  From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste;
  Nor seek unpractised to direct the car,
  Content with javelins to provoke the war.
  Our great forefathers held this prudent course,
  Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force;
  By laws like these immortal conquests made,
  And earth's proud tyrants low in ashes laid."

  So spoke the master of the martial art,
  And touch'd with transport great Atrides' heart.
  "Oh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires,
  And nerves to second what thy soul inspires!
  But wasting years, that wither human race,
  Exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace.
  What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!
  And age the lot of any chief but thee."

  Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried;
  He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied:
  "Well might I wish, could mortal wish renew(134)
  That strength which once in boiling youth I knew;
  Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain
  Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.
  But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows,
  These years with wisdom crowns, with action those:
  The field of combat fits the young and bold,
  The solemn council best becomes the old:
  To you the glorious conflict I resign,
  Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine."

  He said. With joy the monarch march'd before,
  And found Menestheus on the dusty shore,
  With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands;
  And next Ulysses, with his subject bands.
  Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far
  The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war;
  The tumult late begun, they stood intent
  To watch the motion, dubious of the event.
  The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved,
  With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:

  "Can Peleus' son forget a warrior's part.
  And fears Ulysses, skill'd in every art?
  Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
  To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
  From you 'twas hoped among the first to dare
  The shock of armies, and commence the war;
  For this your names are call'd before the rest,
  To share the pleasures of the genial feast:
  And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey
  Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
  Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
  The first in banquets, but the last in fight."

  Ulysses heard: the hero's warmth o'erspread
  His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:
  "Take back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand
  Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
  If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight,
  Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
  Then give thy warrior-chief a warrior's due,
  Who dares to act whate'er thou dar'st to view."
  Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:

  "O great in action, and in council wise!
  With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,
  Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame.
  Sage as thou art, and learn'd in human kind,
  Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
  Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;
  The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends."

  He said, and pass'd where great Tydides lay,
  His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;
  (The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)(135)
  To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:
  "O son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame
  The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name)
  Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
  With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
  Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear'd;
  Still first in front the matchless prince appear'd:
  What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
  Who view'd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
  I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
  A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenae's towers;
  Armies he ask'd, and armies had been given,
  Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
  While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
  Forewarn'd the horrors of the Theban war.(136)
  Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
  A fearless envoy, he approach'd the foes;
  Thebes' hostile walls unguarded and alone,
  Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
  The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
  And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
  Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
  For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
  Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
  To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
  Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
  Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
  Those fifty slaughter'd in the gloomy vale.
  He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
  Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
  Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!"

  No words the godlike Diomed return'd,
  But heard respectful, and in secret burn'd:
  Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted son;
  Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

  "What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
  Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
  Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
  Our value equal, though our fury less.
  With fewer troops we storm'd the Theban wall,
  And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,(137)
  In impious acts the guilty father died;
  The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
  Far more than heirs of all our parents' fame,
  Our glories darken their diminish'd name."

  To him Tydides thus: "My friend, forbear;
  Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:
  His high concern may well excuse this rage,
  Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:
  His the first praise, were Ilion's towers o'erthrown,
  And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
  Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,
  'Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight."

  He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground
  Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
  Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,
  Of arm'd Tydides rushing to the war.
  As when the winds, ascending by degrees,(138)
  First move the whitening surface of the seas,
  The billows float in order to the shore,
  The wave behind rolls on the wave before;
  Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise,
  Foam o'er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
  So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
  Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along
  Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
  No sound, no whisper, but the chief's commands,
  Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,
  As if some god had snatch'd their voice away.
  Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends
  A general shout that all the region rends.
  As when the fleecy flocks unnumber'd stand
  In wealthy folds, and wait the milker's hand,
  The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
  The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills:
  Such clamours rose from various nations round,
  Mix'd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
  Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
  These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,
  Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign;
  And discord raging bathes the purple plain;
  Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power,
  Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
  While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,
  She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;(139)
  The nations bleed, where'er her steps she turns,
  The groan still deepens, and the combat burns.

  Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
  To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
  Victors and vanquish'd join'd promiscuous cries,
  And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
  With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
  Rush to the vales, and pour'd along the plain.
  Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
  The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
  So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

  The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
  The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
  At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
  Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
  Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
  And shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
  So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
  Of force and fire, its walls besmear'd with blood.
  Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,(140)
  Seized to despoil, and dragg'd the corpse along:
  But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
  Agenor's javelin reach'd the hero's heart.
  His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
  Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
  The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
  The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
  Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
  The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
  As o'er their prey rapacious wolves engage,
  Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

  In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
  Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
  Amid the flocks on silver Simois' shore:
  The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
  To seek her parents on his flowery side,
  Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
  And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
  Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
  He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
  So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
  Raised high the head, with stately branches crown'd,
  (Fell'd by some artist with his shining steel,
  To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)
  Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
  With all its beauteous honours on its head
  There, left a subject to the wind and rain,
  And scorch'd by suns, it withers on the plain
  Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
  Stretch'd on the shore, and thus neglected dies.

  At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;
  The pointed lance with erring fury flew,
  And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
  He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain,
  And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
  This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged,
  Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged;
  Arm'd with his spear, he meditates the wound,
  In act to throw; but cautious look'd around,
  Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,
  And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
  A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came,
  Old Priam's son, Democoon was his name.
  The weapon entered close above his ear,
  Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;(141)
  With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath,
  His eye-balls darken with the shades of death;
  Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler rings against the ground.

  Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;
  E'en godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
  Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
  The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
  But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height
  Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.
  "Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
  Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
  Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;
  Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
  Have ye forgot what seem'd your dread before?
  The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more."

  Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty towers,
  Array'd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
  While war's fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
  And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
  Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
  In vain his valour and illustrious line.
  A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
  (Who from cold Cnus led the Thracian crew,)(142)
  Full on his ankle dropp'd the ponderous stone,
  Burst the strong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone.
  Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
  Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
  And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
  The foe rush'd furious as he pants for breath,
  And through his navel drove the pointed death:
  His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
  And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

  His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
  Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
  Amid the lungs was fix'd the winged wood,
  And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
  Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
  The Ctolian warrior tugg'd his weighty spear:
  Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
  And gash'd his belly with a ghastly wound;
  The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
  To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
  The Thracian bands against the victor press'd,
  A grove of lances glitter'd at his breast.
  Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
  In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

  Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
  And one the leader of the Epeian race;
  Death's sable shade at once o'ercast their eyes,
  In dust the vanquish'd and the victor lies.
  With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
  And heap'd with growing mountains of the dead.

  Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
  By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
  Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
  And swords around him innocently play;
  The war's whole art with wonder had he seen,
  And counted heroes where he counted men.

  So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
  And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

                [Illustration: Map of the Plain of Troy.]

                        Map of the Plain of Troy.





BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.

THE ACTS OF DIOMED.

Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day's battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables him
to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending with any
of the former, excepting Venus. Cneas joins Pandarus to oppose him;
Pandarus is killed, and Cneas in great danger but for the assistance of
Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is wounded on the
hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at length carries
off Cneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of Pergamus. Mars
rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a stand. In the meantime
Cneas is restored to the field, and they overthrow several of the Greeks;
among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon. Juno and Minerva descend
to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to go against that god; he
wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven.

The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same as in
the former.

  But Pallas now Tydides' soul inspires,(143)
  Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,
  Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise,
  And crown her hero with distinguish'd praise.
  High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
  His beamy shield emits a living ray;
  The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
  Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies,
  When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,
  And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
  Such glories Pallas on the chief bestow'd,
  Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow'd:
  Onward she drives him, furious to engage,
  Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.

  The sons of Dares first the combat sought,
  A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault;
  In Vulcan's fane the father's days were led,
  The sons to toils of glorious battle bred;
  These singled from their troops the fight maintain,
  These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
  Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,
  And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its erring force.
  Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain,
  But pierced his breast, and stretch'd him on the plain.
  Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled,
  Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
  And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,
  He too had sunk to death's eternal shade;
  But in a smoky cloud the god of fire
  Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
  The steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
  Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

  Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
  Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
  When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
  The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

  "Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
  Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
  Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  While we from interdicted fields retire,
  Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

  Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
  The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
  Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
  They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

  Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
  And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
  First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
  His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

  As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
  The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
  In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
  His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

  Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
  The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
  Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
  From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
  The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
  And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
  And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

  Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
  In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
  Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
  But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
  The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
  From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
  Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
  Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
  Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was thine,
  The graceful fabric and the fair design;
  For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
  To him the shipwright's and the builder's art.
  Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
  The fatal cause of all his country's woes;
  But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,
  Nor saw his country's peril, nor his own.
  The hapless artist, while confused he fled,
  The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast,
  Between the bladder and the bone it pass'd;
  Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries,
  And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.

  From Meges' force the swift Pedaeus fled,
  Antenor's offspring from a foreign bed,
  Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,
  Nursed the young stranger with a mother's care.
  How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear
  Full in his nape infix'd the fatal spear;
  Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,
  And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.

  Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,
  Sprung from the brave Dolopion's mighty line,
  Who near adored Scamander made abode,
  Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
  On him, amidst the flying numbers found,
  Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;
  On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand,
  Thence glancing downwards, lopp'd his holy hand,
  Which stain'd with sacred blood the blushing sand.
  Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death
  Closed his dim eye, and fate suppress'd his breath.

  Thus toil'd the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
  In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;
  Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train,
  Rapt through the ranks he thunders o'er the plain;
  Now here, now there, he darts from place to place,
  Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
  Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong
  Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along,
  Through ruin'd moles the rushing wave resounds,
  O'erwhelm's the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;
  The yellow harvests of the ripen'd year,
  And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear!(144)
  While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain,
  And all the labours of mankind are vain.

  So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
  Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
  With grief the leader of the Lycian band
  Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
  His bended bow against the chief he drew;
  Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
  Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
  Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
  The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
  While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

  "Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
  Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
  Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
  Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain."
  So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
  Stopp'd short of life, and mock'd the shooter's art.
  The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
  The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
  Swift from his seat he leap'd upon the ground,
  And tugg'd the weapon from the gushing wound;
  When thus the king his guardian power address'd,
  The purple current wandering o'er his vest:

  "O progeny of Jove! unconquer'd maid!
  If e'er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
  If e'er I felt thee in the fighting field;
  Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
  O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
  Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard'st in fight;
  And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
  That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more."

  Thus pray'd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
  His nerves confirm'd, his languid spirits cheer'd;
  He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
  His beating bosom claim'd the promised fight.
  "Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
  War be thy province, thy protection mine;
  Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
  Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
  Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
  And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
  Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,(145)
  And set to view the warring deities.
  These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;
  Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
  If Venus mingle in the martial band,
  Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command."

  With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing'd her flight;
  The hero rush'd impetuous to the fight;
  With tenfold ardour now invades the plain,
  Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
  As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls,
  Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;
  If chance some shepherd with a distant dart
  The savage wound, he rouses at the smart,
  He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay,
  But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;
  Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,
  Then leaps victorious o'er the lofty mound.
  Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;
  And two brave leaders at an instant slew;
  Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,
  His people's pastor, good Hypenor, died;
  Astynous' breast the deadly lance receives,
  Hypenor's shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
  Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage
  Abas and Polyidus to engage;
  Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,
  Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold;
  The youths return'd not from the doubtful plain,
  And the sad father tried his arts in vain;
  No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
  Though now determined by Tydides' spear.

  Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage;
  The joy and hope of Phaenops' feeble age:
  Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs
  Of all his labours and a life of cares.
  Cold death o'ertakes them in their blooming years,
  And leaves the father unavailing tears:
  To strangers now descends his heapy store,
  The race forgotten, and the name no more.

  Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride,
  Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
  As when the lordly lion seeks his food
  Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood,
  He leaps amidst them with a furious bound,
  Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
  So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
  Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

  With deep concern divine Cneas view'd
  The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
  Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
  Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
  At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

  "Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
  Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
  Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
  And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
  O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
  That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
  Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
  (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
  For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
  Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
  If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

  To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
  If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
  Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
  So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
  If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
  Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
  Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
  And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
  I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
  The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
  And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unerring hands.
  Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
  Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
  Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
  And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
  There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
  And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
  The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
  When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
  In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
  And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
  But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
  I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
  And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown)
  Might fail of forage in the straiten'd town;
  So took my bow and pointed darts in hand
  And left the chariots in my native land.

  "Too late, O friend! my rashness I deplore;
  These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
  Tydeus' and Atreus' sons their points have found,
  And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
  In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow
  Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
  In evil hour these bended horns I strung,
  And seized the quiver where it idly hung.
  Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field
  Without a warrior's arms, the spear and shield!
  If e'er with life I quit the Trojan plain,
  If e'er I see my spouse and sire again,
  This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,
  Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames."

  To whom the leader of the Dardan race:
  "Be calm, nor Phoebus' honour'd gift disgrace.
  The distant dart be praised, though here we need
  The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
  Against yon hero let us bend our course,
  And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
  Now mount my seat, and from the chariot's height
  Observe my father's steeds, renown'd in fight;
  Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
  To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race;
  Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;
  Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
  Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;
  The warrior's fury let this arm sustain;
  Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,
  Take thou the spear, the chariot's care be mine."

  "O prince! (Lycaon's valiant son replied)
  As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
  The horses, practised to their lord's command,
  Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;
  But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight,
  Thy voice alone can animate their flight;
  Else shall our fates be number'd with the dead,
  And these, the victor's prize, in triumph led.
  Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield
  Myself will charge this terror of the field."

  And now both heroes mount the glittering car;
  The bounding coursers rush amidst the war;
  Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,
  Who thus, alarm'd, to great Tydides cried:

  "O friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,
  Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee:
  Lo the brave heir of old Lycaon's line,
  And great Cneas, sprung from race divine!
  Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!
  And save a life, the bulwark of our war."

  At this the hero cast a gloomy look,
  Fix'd on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:

  "Me dost thou bid to shun the coming fight?
  Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
  Know, 'tis not honest in my soul to fear,
  Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.
  I hate the cumbrous chariot's slow advance,
  And the long distance of the flying lance;
  But while my nerves are strong, my force entire,
  Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
  Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey
  Those threatening heroes, bear them both away;
  One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;
  So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
  But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,
  That both shall fall by one victorious hand,
  Then heed my words: my horses here detain,
  Fix'd to the chariot by the straiten'd rein;
  Swift to Cneas' empty seat proceed,
  And seize the coursers of ethereal breed;
  The race of those, which once the thundering god(146)
  For ravish'd Ganymede on Tros bestow'd,
  The best that e'er on earth's broad surface run,
  Beneath the rising or the setting sun.
  Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown,
  By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:
  Four of this race his ample stalls contain,
  And two transport Cneas o'er the plain.
  These, were the rich immortal prize our own,
  Through the wide world should make our glory known."

  Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,
  And stern Lycaon's warlike race begun:

  "Prince, thou art met. Though late in vain assail'd,
  The spear may enter where the arrow fail'd."

  He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung;
  On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,
  Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung,
  "He bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)
  Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!"
  "Mistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)
  Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;
  Ye 'scape not both; one, headlong from his car,
  With hostile blood shall glut the god of war."

  He spoke, and rising hurl'd his forceful dart,
  Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;
  Full in his face it enter'd, and betwixt
  The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fix'd;
  Crash'd all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,
  Till the bright point look'd out beneath the chin.
  Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground:
  Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;
  The starting coursers tremble with affright;
  The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.

  To guard his slaughter'd friend, Cneas flies,
  His spear extending where the carcase lies;
  Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,
  As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
  O'er the fall'n trunk his ample shield display'd,
  He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
  And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
  Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
  Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
  Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:(147)
  He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
  Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
  Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
  Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
  Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
  And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
  Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
  His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
  Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
  A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
  There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
  Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
  But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
  She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
  His danger views with anguish and despair,
  And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
  About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
  Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
  Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
  The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
  Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
  Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

  Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
  Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
  His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
  He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
  Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
  The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
  These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
  No longer now a Trojan lord obey'd.
  That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
  (Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
  Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
  And follow'd where Tydides swept the plain.

  Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
  The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
  No goddess she, commission'd to the field,
  Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,
  Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall,
  While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;
  He knew soft combats suit the tender dame,
  New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
  Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends,
  And at the goddess his broad lance extends;
  Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove,
  The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove;
  Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,
  And the transparent skin with crimson stain'd,
  From the clear vein a stream immortal flow'd,
  Such stream as issues from a wounded god;(148)
  Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!
  Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:
  (For not the bread of man their life sustains,
  Nor wine's inflaming juice supplies their veins:)
  With tender shrieks the goddess fill'd the place,
  And dropp'd her offspring from her weak embrace.
  Him Phoebus took: he casts a cloud around
  The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.

  Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,
  The king insults the goddess as she flies:
  "Ill with Jove's daughter bloody fights agree,
  The field of combat is no scene for thee:
  Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,
  Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
  Taught by this stroke renounce the war's alarms,
  And learn to tremble at the name of arms."

  Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread,
  Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
  To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew,
  Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.
  The queen of love with faded charms she found.
  Pale was her cheek, and livid look'd the wound.
  To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:
  Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay;
  Beside him stood his lance, distain'd with gore,
  And, rein'd with gold, his foaming steeds before.
  Low at his knee, she begg'd with streaming eyes
  Her brother's car, to mount the distant skies,
  And show'd the wound by fierce Tydides given,
  A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
  Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
  And to her hand commits the golden rein;
  She mounts the seat, oppress'd with silent woe,
  Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
  The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
  And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
  They stopp'd the car, and there the coursers stood,
  Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
  Before her mother, love's bright queen appears,
  O'erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
  She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
  And ask'd what god had wrought this guilty deed?

  [Illustration: VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.]

          VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.


  Then she: "This insult from no god I found,
  An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
  Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
  'Twas in the son's defence the mother bled.
  The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
  But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage."

  Dione then: "Thy wrongs with patience bear,
  And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
  Unnumber'd woes mankind from us sustain,
  And men with woes afflict the gods again.
  The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,(149)
  And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
  Full thirteen moons imprison'd roar'd in vain;
  Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
  Perhaps had perish'd had not Hermes' care
  Restored the groaning god to upper air.
  Great Juno's self has borne her weight of pain,
  The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
  Amphitryon's son infix'd the deadly dart,(150)
  And fill'd with anguish her immortal heart.
  E'en hell's grim king Alcides' power confess'd,
  The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
  To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
  Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
  Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
  Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
  Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
  And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!

         [Illustration: OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.]

                 OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.


  "But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
  Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
  Know thou, whoe'er with heavenly power contends,
  Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
  From fields of death when late he shall retire,
  No infant on his knees shall call him sire.
  Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,
  To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground;
  Thy distant wife, Cgiale the fair,(151)
  Starting from sleep with a distracted air,
  Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore,
  The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!"

  This said, she wiped from Venus' wounded palm
  The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
  Juno and Pallas with a smile survey'd,
  And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:

  "Permit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell
  How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,
  As late she tried with passion to inflame
  The tender bosom of a Grecian dame;
  Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,
  To quit her country for some youth of Troy;
  The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,
  Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound."

  The sire of gods and men superior smiled,
  And, calling Venus, thus address'd his child:
  "Not these, O daughter are thy proper cares,
  Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
  Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
  To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms."

  Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below
  The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,
  Flush'd with celestial blood pursued his way,
  And fearless dared the threatening god of day;
  Already in his hopes he saw him kill'd,
  Though screen'd behind Apollo's mighty shield.
  Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook;
  His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook:
  He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see
  How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
  Distance immense! between the powers that shine
  Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
  And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
  A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth."

  So spoke the god who darts celestial fires:
  He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
  Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venus' race
  To Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
  Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
  With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
  This done, the patron of the silver bow
  A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
  With great Cneas; such the form he bore,
  And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
  Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
  And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
  Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
  And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

  "Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
  Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
  Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
  Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
  First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
  Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
  The wretch would brave high heaven's immortal sire,
  His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire."

  The god of battle issues on the plain,
  Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
  In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
  Enraged to Troy's retiring chiefs he cried:

  "How long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,
  And unrevenged see Priam's people die?
  Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,
  And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
  Lo, brave Cneas sinks beneath his wound,
  Not godlike Hector more in arms renown'd:
  Haste all, and take the generous warrior's part.
  He said;--new courage swell'd each hero's heart.
  Sarpedon first his ardent soul express'd,
  And, turn'd to Hector, these bold words address'd:

  "Say, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
  Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,
  That propp'd alone by Priam's race should stand
  Troy's sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
  Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,
  And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
  Remote they stand while alien troops engage,
  Like trembling hounds before the lion's rage.
  Far distant hence I held my wide command,
  Where foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land;
  With ample wealth (the wish of mortals) bless'd,
  A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast;
  With those I left whatever dear could be:
  Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me;
  Yet first in fight my Lycian bands I cheer,
  And long to meet this mighty man ye fear;
  While Hector idle stands, nor bids the brave
  Their wives, their infants, and their altars save.
  Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threaten'd state,
  Or one vast burst of all-involving fate
  Full o'er your towers shall fall, and sweep away
  Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguish'd prey.
  Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight;
  These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night;
  With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose;
  Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes."

  Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears,
  But just reproof with decent silence bears.
  From his proud car the prince impetuous springs,
  On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings.
  Two shining spears are brandish'd in his hands;
  Thus arm'd, he animates his drooping bands,
  Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
  And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
  They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare,
  Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.

  As when, on Ceres' sacred floor, the swain
  Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain,
  And the light chaff, before the breezes borne,
  Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn;
  The grey dust, rising with collected winds,
  Drives o'er the barn, and whitens all the hinds:
  So white with dust the Grecian host appears.
  From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers;
  The dusky clouds from labour'd earth arise,
  And roll in smoking volumes to the skies.
  Mars hovers o'er them with his sable shield,
  And adds new horrors to the darken'd field:
  Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
  In Troy's defence, Apollo's heavenly will:
  Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires,
  Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires.
  And now the god, from forth his sacred fane,
  Produced Cneas to the shouting train;
  Alive, unharm'd, with all his peers around,
  Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound:
  Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day
  No pause of words admits, no dull delay;
  Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,
  Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the field's in flames.

  Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood,
  And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
  Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train
  The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
  Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait
  Serenely dreadful, and as fix'd as fate.
  So when the embattled clouds in dark array,
  Along the skies their gloomy lines display;
  When now the North his boisterous rage has spent,
  And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:
  The low-hung vapours, motionless and still,
  Rest on the summits of the shaded hill;
  Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,
  Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.

  Nor was the general wanting to his train;
  From troop to troop he toils through all the plain,
  "Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;
  Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
  Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire,
  And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
  On valour's side the odds of combat lie,
  The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
  The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
  Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!"

  These words he seconds with his flying lance,
  To meet whose point was strong Deicoon's chance:
  Cneas' friend, and in his native place
  Honour'd and loved like Priam's royal race:
  Long had he fought the foremost in the field,
  But now the monarch's lance transpierced his shield:
  His shield too weak the furious dart to stay,
  Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:
  The grisly wound dismiss'd his soul to hell,
  His arms around him rattled as he fell.

  Then fierce Cneas, brandishing his blade,
  In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,
  Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great,
  In well-built Pherae held his lofty seat:(152)
  Sprung from Alpheus' plenteous stream, that yields
  Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
  He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,
  And these descended in the third degree.
  Too early expert in the martial toil,
  In sable ships they left their native soil,
  To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain,
  They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain.
  So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood
  In deep recesses of the gloomy wood,
  Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontroll'd
  Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold:
  Till pierced at distance from their native den,
  O'erpowered they fall beneath the force of men.
  Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay,
  Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.
  Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes,
  Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies;
  Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate,
  The god but urged him to provoke his fate.
  He thus advancing, Nestor's valiant son
  Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own;
  Struck with the thought, should Helen's lord be slain,
  And all his country's glorious labours vain.
  Already met, the threatening heroes stand;
  The spears already tremble in their hand:
  In rush'd Antilochus, his aid to bring,
  And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.
  These seen, the Dardan backward turn'd his course,
  Brave as he was, and shunn'd unequal force.
  The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew,
  Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.

  First, Pylaemenes, great in battle, bled,
  Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
  Atrides mark'd him where sublime he stood;
  Fix'd in his throat the javelin drank his blood.
  The faithful Mydon, as he turn'd from fight
  His flying coursers, sunk to endless night;
  A broken rock by Nestor's son was thrown:
  His bended arm received the falling stone;
  From his numb'd hand the ivory-studded reins,
  Dropp'd in the dust, are trail'd along the plains:
  Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly wound;
  He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground:
  Deep drove his helmet in the sands, and there
  The head stood fix'd, the quivering legs in air,
  Till trampled flat beneath the coursers' feet:
  The youthful victor mounts his empty seat,
  And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet.

  Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view,
  Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue:
  He fires his host with animating cries,
  And brings along the furies of the skies,
  Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread,
  Flame in the front, and thunder at their head:
  This swells the tumult and the rage of fight;
  That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light.
  Where Hector march'd, the god of battles shined,
  Now storm'd before him, and now raged behind.

  Tydides paused amidst his full career;
  Then first the hero's manly breast knew fear.
  As when some simple swain his cot forsakes,
  And wide through fens an unknown journey takes:
  If chance a swelling brook his passage stay,
  And foam impervious 'cross the wanderer's way,
  Confused he stops, a length of country pass'd,
  Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.
  Amazed no less the great Tydides stands:
  He stay'd, and turning thus address'd his bands:

  "No wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield;
  Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field;
  His strokes they second, and avert our spears.
  Behold where Mars in mortal arms appears!
  Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow;
  Retire, but with your faces to the foe.
  Trust not too much your unavailing might;
  'Tis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight."

  Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew;
  And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:
  His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found,
  In every art of glorious war renown'd;
  In the same car the chiefs to combat ride,
  And fought united, and united died.
  Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows
  With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
  His massy spear with matchless fury sent,
  Through Amphius' belt and heaving belly went;
  Amphius Apaesus' happy soil possess'd,
  With herds abounding, and with treasure bless'd;
  But fate resistless from his country led
  The chief, to perish at his people's head.
  Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung,
  And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung;
  Around his head an iron tempest rain'd;
  A wood of spears his ample shield sustain'd:
  Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press'd,
  And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast:
  He could no more; the showering darts denied
  To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
  Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields,
  With bristling lances, and compacted shields;
  Till in the steely circle straiten'd round,
  Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.

  While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,(153)
  Urged by the force of unresisted fate,
  Burns with desire Sarpedon's strength to prove;
  Alcides' offspring meets the son of Jove.
  Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
  Jove's great descendant, and his greater son.
  Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss'd,
  The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:

  "What brings this Lycian counsellor so far,
  To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
  Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move,
  Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
  How far unlike those chiefs of race divine,
  How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
  Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul
  No fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell control.
  Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand
  Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand:
  With six small ships, and but a slender train,
  He left the town a wide-deserted plain.
  But what art thou, who deedless look'st around,
  While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!
  Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can be;
  But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me.
  Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
  I make this present to the shades below."

  The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide,
  Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied:

  "Thy sire, O prince! o'erturn'd the Trojan state,
  Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate;
  Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far,
  False he detain'd, the just reward of war.
  Nor so content, the generous chief defied,
  With base reproaches and unmanly pride.
  But you, unworthy the high race you boast,
  Shall raise my glory when thy own is lost:
  Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,
  Add one more ghost to Pluto's gloomy reign."

  He said: both javelins at an instant flew;
  Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedon's slew:
  Full in the boaster's neck the weapon stood,
  Transfix'd his throat, and drank the vital blood;
  The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night,
  And his seal'd eyes for ever lose the light.

  Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown
  Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone
  Sarpedon's thigh, had robb'd the chief of breath;
  But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
  Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,
  The wounded hero dragg'd the lance along.
  (His friends, each busied in his several part,
  Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.)
  The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;
  Whose fall Ulysses view'd, with fury fired;
  Doubtful if Jove's great son he should pursue,
  Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
  But heaven and fate the first design withstand,
  Nor this great death must grace Ulysses' hand.
  Minerva drives him on the Lycian train;
  Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew'd the plain,
  Alcander, Prytanis, Noemon fell:(154)
  And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,
  But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,
  Rush'd terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
  With joy Sarpedon view'd the wish'd relief,
  And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief:

  "O suffer not the foe to bear away
  My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey;
  If I, unbless'd, must see my son no more,
  My much-loved consort, and my native shore,
  Yet let me die in Ilion's sacred wall;
  Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall."

  He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,
  But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies;
  Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes;
  And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.

  Beneath a beech, Jove's consecrated shade,
  His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:
  Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh,
  Who wrench'd the javelin from his sinewy thigh.
  The fainting soul stood ready wing'd for flight,
  And o'er his eye-balls swam the shades of night;
  But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath,
  Recall'd his spirit from the gates of death.

  The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace,
  Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face;
  None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight,
  Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.
  Who first, who last, by Mars' and Hector's hand,
  Stretch'd in their blood, lay gasping on the sand?
  Tenthras the great, Orestes the renown'd
  For managed steeds, and Trechus press'd the ground;,
  Next OEnomaus and OEnops' offspring died;
  Oresbius last fell groaning at their side:
  Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay,
  In fat Boeotia held his wealthy sway,
  Where lakes surround low Hyle's watery plain;
  A prince and people studious of their gain.

  The carnage Juno from the skies survey'd,
  And touch'd with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid:
  "Oh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy prevail,
  And shall our promise to our people fail?
  How vain the word to Menelaus given
  By Jove's great daughter and the queen of heaven,
  Beneath his arms that Priam's towers should fall,
  If warring gods for ever guard the wall!
  Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes:
  Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!"

  She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war:
  And now heaven's empress calls her blazing car.
  At her command rush forth the steeds divine;
  Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
  Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young,
  The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
  On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel
  Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel.
  Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame;
  The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame,
  Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold
  Two brazen rings of work divine were roll'd.
  The bossy naves of sold silver shone;
  Braces of gold suspend the moving throne:
  The car, behind, an arching figure bore;
  The bending concave form'd an arch before.
  Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold,
  And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
  Herself, impatient, to the ready car,
  The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.

  Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied,
  With flowers adorn'd, with art diversified,
  (The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,)
  Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove.
  Now heaven's dread arms her mighty limbs invest,
  Jove's cuirass blazes on her ample breast;
  Deck'd in sad triumph for the mournful field,
  O'er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield,
  Dire, black, tremendous! Round the margin roll'd,
  A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:
  Here all the terrors of grim War appear,
  Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear,
  Here storm'd Contention, and here Fury frown'd,
  And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crown'd.
  The massy golden helm she next assumes,
  That dreadful nods with four o'ershading plumes;
  So vast, the broad circumference contains
  A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
  The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;
  Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends,
  Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns,
  Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

  Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly,
  While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
  Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,(155)
  Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;(156)
  Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
  The sun's bright portals and the skies command,
  Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,
  Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
  The sounding hinges ring on either side
  The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
  The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies,
  Confused, Olympus' hundred heads arise;
  Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne,
  O'er all the gods superior and alone.
  There with her snowy hand the queen restrains
  The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:

  "O sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
  Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
  What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,
  What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
  Venus, and Phoebus with the dreadful bow,
  Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
  Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind
  No god can govern, and no justice bind.
  Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,
  And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?"

  To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:
  "Go! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
  To tame the monster-god Minerva knows,
  And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes."

  He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey,
  Lash'd her white steeds along the aerial way
  Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls,
  Between the expanded earth and starry poles
  Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,(157)
  O'er the wide main extends his boundless eye,
  Through such a space of air, with thundering sound,
  At every leap the immortal coursers bound
  Troy now they reach'd and touch'd those banks divine,
  Where silver Simois and Scamander join
  There Juno stopp'd, and (her fair steeds unloosed)
  Of air condensed a vapour circumfused
  For these, impregnate with celestial dew,
  On Simois, brink ambrosial herbage grew.
  Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng,
  Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.

  The best and bravest of the Grecian band
  (A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.
  Such was their look as lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood
  Heaven's empress mingles with the mortal crowd,
  And shouts, in Stentor's sounding voice, aloud;
  Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,(158)
  Whose throats surpass'd the force of fifty tongues.

  "Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame,
  And only men in figure and in name!
  Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,
  While fierce in war divine Achilles raged;
  Now issuing fearless they possess the plain,
  Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain."

  Her speech new fury to their hearts convey'd;
  While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;
  The king beside his panting steeds she found,
  O'erspent with toil reposing on the ground;
  To cool his glowing wound he sat apart,
  (The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)
  Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,
  Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend,
  Whose ample belt, that o'er his shoulder lay,
  He eased; and wash'd the clotted gore away.
  The goddess leaning o'er the bending yoke,
  Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke:

  "Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus' kind,
  Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
  Foremost he press'd in glorious toils to share,
  And scarce refrain'd when I forbade the war.
  Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
  And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
  There braved, and vanquish'd, many a hardy knight;
  Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
  Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
  Thy hands I arm'd, and sent thee forth to war:
  But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;
  No drop of all thy father warms thy veins."

  The chief thus answered mild: "Immortal maid!
  I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
  Not fear, thou know'st, withholds me from the plains,
  Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:
  From warring gods thou bad'st me turn my spear,
  And Venus only found resistance here.
  Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands,
  Loth I gave way, and warn'd our Argive bands:
  For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,
  With slaughter red, and raging round the field."

  Then thus Minerva:--"Brave Tydides, hear!
  Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
  Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:
  Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
  Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,
  And every side of wavering combat tries;
  Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made:
  Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid."(159)

  She said, and to the steeds approaching near,
  Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
  The vigorous power the trembling car ascends,
  Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:
  The groaning axle bent beneath the load;
  So great a hero, and so great a god.
  She snatch'd the reins, she lash'd with all her force,
  And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse:
  But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread
  Black Orcus' helmet o'er her radiant head.

            [Illustration: DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.]

                    DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.


  Just then gigantic Periphas lay slain,
  The strongest warrior of the Ctolian train;
  The god, who slew him, leaves his prostrate prize
  Stretch'd where he fell, and at Tydides flies.
  Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear
  The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war!
  Full at the chief, above his courser's head,
  From Mars's arm the enormous weapon fled:
  Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance
  Far from the car the strong immortal lance.
  Then threw the force of Tydeus' warlike son;
  The javelin hiss'd; the goddess urged it on:
  Where the broad cincture girt his armour round,
  It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.
  From the rent skin the warrior tugs again
  The smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain:
  Loud as the roar encountering armies yield,
  When shouting millions shake the thundering field.
  Both armies start, and trembling gaze around;
  And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound.
  As vapours blown by Auster's sultry breath,
  Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death,
  Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise,
  Choke the parch'd earth, and blacken all the skies;
  In such a cloud the god from combat driven,
  High o'er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.
  Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes,
  There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods,
  Show'd the celestial blood, and with a groan
  Thus pour'd his plaints before the immortal throne:

  "Can Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey,
  And brook the furies of this daring day?
  For mortal men celestial powers engage,
  And gods on gods exert eternal rage:
  From thee, O father! all these ills we bear,
  And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear;
  Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light,
  Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right.
  All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway,
  Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey:
  'Tis hers to offend, and even offending share
  Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguish'd care:
  So boundless she, and thou so partial grown,
  Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.
  Now frantic Diomed, at her command,
  Against the immortals lifts his raging hand:
  The heavenly Venus first his fury found,
  Me next encountering, me he dared to wound;
  Vanquish'd I fled; even I, the god of fight,
  From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.
  Else hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain,
  Heap'd round, and heaving under loads of slain!
  Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie,
  Condemn'd to pain, though fated not to die."

  Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look
  The lord of thunders view'd, and stern bespoke:
  "To me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?
  Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain?
  Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies,
  Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!
  Inhuman discord is thy dire delight,
  The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
  No bounds, no law, thy fiery temper quells,
  And all thy mother in thy soul rebels.
  In vain our threats, in vain our power we use;
  She gives the example, and her son pursues.
  Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn,
  Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born.
  Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,
  Where chain'd on burning rocks the Titans groan."

  Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod;
  Then gave to Paeon's care the bleeding god.(160)
  With gentle hand the balm he pour'd around,
  And heal'd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
  As when the fig's press'd juice, infused in cream,
  To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
  Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
  Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join'd.
  Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress'd
  His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
  Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
  Fast by the throne of heaven's superior lord.
  Juno and Pallas mount the bless'd abodes,
  Their task perform'd, and mix among the gods.

                          [Illustration: JUNO.]

                                  JUNO.





BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.

THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.

The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the chief
augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to appoint
a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the temple of
Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The battle
relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have an
interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of the
friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they make
exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus,
prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a tender leave of
his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.

The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers Simois and
Scamander, and then changes to Troy.

  Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield
  To human force and human skill the field:
  Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;
  Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows;
  While Troy's famed streams, that bound the deathful plain
  On either side, run purple to the main.

  Great Ajax first to conquest led the way,
  Broke the thick ranks, and turn'd the doubtful day.
  The Thracian Acamas his falchion found,
  And hew'd the enormous giant to the ground;
  His thundering arm a deadly stroke impress'd
  Where the black horse-hair nodded o'er his crest;
  Fix'd in his front the brazen weapon lies,
  And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes.
  Next Teuthras' son distain'd the sands with blood,
  Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good:
  In fair Arisbe's walls (his native place)(161)
  He held his seat! a friend to human race.
  Fast by the road, his ever-open door
  Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
  To stern Tydides now he falls a prey,
  No friend to guard him in the dreadful day!
  Breathless the good man fell, and by his side
  His faithful servant, old Calesius died.

  By great Euryalus was Dresus slain,
  And next he laid Opheltius on the plain.
  Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young,
  From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung:
  (Laomedon's white flocks Bucolion fed,
  That monarch's first-born by a foreign bed;
  In secret woods he won the naiad's grace,
  And two fair infants crown'd his strong embrace:)
  Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms;
  The ruthless victor stripp'd their shining arms.

  Astyalus by Polypoetes fell;
  Ulysses' spear Pidytes sent to hell;
  By Teucer's shaft brave Aretaon bled,
  And Nestor's son laid stern Ablerus dead;
  Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave,
  The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave,
  Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,(162)
  And till'd the banks where silver Satnio flow'd.
  Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain;
  And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain.

  Unbless'd Adrastus next at mercy lies
  Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize.
  Scared with the din and tumult of the fight,
  His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight,
  Rush'd on a tamarisk's strong trunk, and broke
  The shatter'd chariot from the crooked yoke;
  Wide o'er the field, resistless as the wind,
  For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.
  Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel:
  Atrides o'er him shakes his vengeful steel;
  The fallen chief in suppliant posture press'd
  The victor's knees, and thus his prayer address'd:

  "O spare my youth, and for the life I owe
  Large gifts of price my father shall bestow.
  When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain,
  Thy hollow ships his captive son detain:
  Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,(163)
  And steel well-temper'd, and persuasive gold."

  He said: compassion touch'd the hero's heart
  He stood, suspended with the lifted dart:
  As pity pleaded for his vanquish'd prize,
  Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,
  And, furious, thus: "Oh impotent of mind!(164)
  Shall these, shall these Atrides' mercy find?
  Well hast thou known proud Troy's perfidious land,
  And well her natives merit at thy hand!
  Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age,
  Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:
  Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
  Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;(165)
  A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,
  To warn the nations, and to curb the great!"

  The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address'd,
  To rigid justice steel'd his brother's breast
  Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust;
  The monarch's javelin stretch'd him in the dust,
  Then pressing with his foot his panting heart,
  Forth from the slain he tugg'd the reeking dart.
  Old Nestor saw, and roused the warrior's rage;
  "Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage;
  No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,
  To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
  Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
  First gain the conquest, then reward the toil."

  And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,
  And frighted Troy within her walls, retired,
  Had not sage Helenus her state redress'd,
  Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
  Where Hector stood, with great Cneas join'd,
  The seer reveal'd the counsels of his mind:

  "Ye generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay
  The cares and glories of this doubtful day;
  On whom your aids, your country's hopes depend;
  Wise to consult, and active to defend!
  Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite,
  Turn back the routed, and forbid the flight,
  Ere yet their wives' soft arms the cowards gain,
  The sport and insult of the hostile train.
  When your commands have hearten'd every band,
  Ourselves, here fix'd, will make the dangerous stand;
  Press'd as we are, and sore of former fight,
  These straits demand our last remains of might.
  Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire,
  And teach our mother what the gods require:
  Direct the queen to lead the assembled train
  Of Troy's chief matrons to Minerva's fane;(166)
  Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power,
  With offer'd vows, in Ilion's topmost tower.
  The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altars led:
  If so the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare,
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire;
  Not thus Achilles taught our hosts to dread,
  Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed;
  Not thus resistless ruled the stream of fight,
  In rage unbounded, and unmatch'd in might."

  Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,
  Leap'd from his trembling chariot to the ground;
  Through all his host inspiring force he flies,
  And bids the thunder of the battle rise.
  With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,
  And turn the tide of conflict on the foe:
  Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears;
  All Greece recedes, and 'midst her triumphs fears;
  Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars,
  Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.

  Then thus aloud: "Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!
  And you whom distant nations send to war!
  Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
  Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
  One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
  To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
  Nor shall, I trust, the matrons' holy train,
  And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain."

  This said, with ample strides the hero pass'd;
  The shield's large orb behind his shoulder cast,
  His neck o'ershading, to his ankle hung;
  And as he march'd the brazen buckler rung.

  Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),(167)
  Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus' son
  Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
  Observed each other, and had mark'd for war.
  Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Our eyes till now that aspect ne'er beheld,
  Where fame is reap'd amid the embattled field;
  Yet far before the troops thou dar'st appear,
  And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
  Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
  Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
  But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,
  Know with immortals we no more contend.
  Not long Lycurgus view'd the golden light,
  That daring man who mix'd with gods in fight.
  Bacchus, and Bacchus' votaries, he drove,
  With brandish'd steel, from Nyssa's sacred grove:
  Their consecrated spears lay scatter'd round,
  With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;
  While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood,
  And Thetis' arms received the trembling god.
  Nor fail'd the crime the immortals' wrath to move;
  (The immortals bless'd with endless ease above;)
  Deprived of sight by their avenging doom,
  Cheerless he breathed, and wander'd in the gloom,
  Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes,
  A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods!
  I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth
  Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth,
  Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,
  Approach, and enter the dark gates of death."

  "What, or from whence I am, or who my sire,
  (Replied the chief,) can Tydeus' son inquire?
  Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
  Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
  Another race the following spring supplies;
  They fall successive, and successive rise:
  So generations in their course decay;
  So flourish these, when those are pass'd away.
  But if thou still persist to search my birth,
  Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth.

  "A city stands on Argos' utmost bound,
  (Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renown'd,)
  Aeolian Sisyphus, with wisdom bless'd,
  In ancient time the happy wall possess'd,
  Then call'd Ephyre: Glaucus was his son;
  Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon,
  Who o'er the sons of men in beauty shined,
  Loved for that valour which preserves mankind.
  Then mighty Praetus Argos' sceptre sway'd,
  Whose hard commands Bellerophon obey'd.
  With direful jealousy the monarch raged,
  And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
  For him Antaea burn'd with lawless flame,
  And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
  In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
  Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
  Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled,
  And begg'd revenge for her insulted bed:
  Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate;
  But hospitable laws restrain'd his hate:
  To Lycia the devoted youth he sent,
  With tablets seal'd, that told his dire intent.(168)
  Now bless'd by every power who guards the good,
  The chief arrived at Xanthus' silver flood:
  There Lycia's monarch paid him honours due,
  Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
  But when the tenth bright morning orient glow'd,
  The faithful youth his monarch's mandate show'd:
  The fatal tablets, till that instant seal'd,
  The deathful secret to the king reveal'd.
  First, dire Chimaera's conquest was enjoin'd;
  A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
  Behind, a dragon's fiery tail was spread;
  A goat's rough body bore a lion's head;
  Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
  Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

  "This pest he slaughter'd, (for he read the skies,
  And trusted heaven's informing prodigies,)
  Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,(169)
  (Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
  Next the bold Amazons' whole force defied;
  And conquer'd still, for heaven was on his side.

  "Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
  At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
  With levell'd spears along the winding shore:
  There fell they breathless, and return'd no more.

  "At length the monarch, with repentant grief,
  Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
  His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
  With half the honours of his ample reign:
  The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
  With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crown'd.
  There long the chief his happy lot possess'd,
  With two brave sons and one fair daughter bless'd;
  (Fair e'en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love
  Crown'd with Sarpedon's birth the embrace of Jove;)
  But when at last, distracted in his mind,
  Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,
  Wide o'er the Aleian field he chose to stray,
  A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way!(170)
  Woes heap'd on woes consumed his wasted heart:
  His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebe's dart;
  His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,
  In combat on the Solymaean plain.
  Hippolochus survived: from him I came,
  The honour'd author of my birth and name;
  By his decree I sought the Trojan town;
  By his instructions learn to win renown,
  To stand the first in worth as in command,
  To add new honours to my native land,
  Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,
  And emulate the glories of our race."

  He spoke, and transport fill'd Tydides' heart;
  In earth the generous warrior fix'd his dart,
  Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince address'd:
  "Welcome, my brave hereditary guest!
  Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,
  Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
  Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old;
  OEneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:
  Our ancient seat his honour'd presence graced,
  Where twenty days in genial rites he pass'd.
  The parting heroes mutual presents left;
  A golden goblet was thy grandsire's gift;
  OEneus a belt of matchless work bestowed,
  That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glow'd.
  (This from his pledge I learn'd, which, safely stored
  Among my treasures, still adorns my board:
  For Tydeus left me young, when Thebe's wall
  Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.)
  Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;
  If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline,
  My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.
  Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield,
  In the full harvest of yon ample field;
  Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
  But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
  Now change we arms, and prove to either host
  We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

  Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
  Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
  Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
  (Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
  For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
  For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
  He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,(171)
  A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

  Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Great Hector, enter'd at the Scaean gate.(172)
  Beneath the beech-tree's consecrated shades,
  The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
  Around him flock'd, all press'd with pious care
  For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
  He bids the train in long procession go,
  And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
  And now to Priam's stately courts he came,
  Rais'd on arch'd columns of stupendous frame;
  O'er these a range of marble structure runs,
  The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
  In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,(173)
  Opposed to those, where Priam's daughters sate.
  Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
  Of equal beauty, and of polish'd stone.
  Hither great Hector pass'd, nor pass'd unseen
  Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
  (With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
  Surpass'd the nymphs of Troy's illustrious race.)
  Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
  And press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "O Hector! say, what great occasion calls
  My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
  Com'st thou to supplicate the almighty power
  With lifted hands, from Ilion's lofty tower?
  Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown'd,
  In Jove's high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
  And pay due vows to all the gods around.
  Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul,
  And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;
  Spent as thou art with long laborious fight,
  The brave defender of thy country's right."

  "Far hence be Bacchus' gifts; (the chief rejoin'd;)
  Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,
  Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
  Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice
  To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
  By me that holy office were profaned;
  Ill fits it me, with human gore distain'd,
  To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise,
  Or offer heaven's great Sire polluted praise.
  You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train,
  And burn rich odours in Minerva's fane.
  The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
  So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
  Be this, O mother, your religious care:
  I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
  If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
  The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
  Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
  That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!(174)
  Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
  Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end."

  This heard, she gave command: and summon'd came
  Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
  The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
  Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
  There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
  Sidonian maids embroider'd every part,
  Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
  With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
  Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
  The various textures and the various dyes,
  She chose a veil that shone superior far,
  And glow'd refulgent as the morning star.
  Herself with this the long procession leads;
  The train majestically slow proceeds.
  Soon as to Ilion's topmost tower they come,
  And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
  Antenor's consort, fair Theano, waits
  As Pallas' priestess, and unbars the gates.
  With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
  They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
  The priestess then the shining veil displays,
  Placed on Minerva's knees, and thus she prays:

  "Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
  Troy's strong defence, unconquer'd Pallas, aid!
  Break thou Tydides' spear, and let him fall
  Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
  So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
  Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
  But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,
  Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!"
  So pray'd the priestess in her holy fane;
  So vow'd the matrons, but they vow'd in vain.

  While these appear before the power with prayers,
  Hector to Paris' lofty dome repairs.(175)
  Himself the mansion raised, from every part
  Assembling architects of matchless art.
  Near Priam's court and Hector's palace stands
  The pompous structure, and the town commands.
  A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length,
  The steely point with golden ringlets join'd,
  Before him brandish'd, at each motion shined
  Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found
  His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round,
  His eyes delighting with their splendid show,
  Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
  Beside him Helen with her virgins stands,
  Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.

  Him thus inactive, with an ardent look
  The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
  "Thy hate to Troy, is this the time to show?
  (O wretch ill-fated, and thy country's foe!)
  Paris and Greece against us both conspire,
  Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
  For thee great Ilion's guardian heroes fall,
  Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall,
  For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,
  And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
  Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,
  Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
  Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,
  And all the Phrygian glories at an end."

  "Brother, 'tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,)
  Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:
  Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
  On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:
  Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate,
  And mourn'd, in secret, his and Ilion's fate.
  'Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,
  And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
  Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,
  'Tis man's to fight, but heaven's to give success.
  But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;
  Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind."

                  [Illustration: HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.]

                          HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.


  He said, nor answer'd Priam's warlike son;
  When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:

  "Oh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame
  That caused these woes deserve a sister's name!)
  Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,
  The day that show'd me to the golden sun
  Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear
  The fatal infant to the fowls of air?
  Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,
  And midst the roarings of the waters died?
  Heaven fill'd up all my ills, and I accursed
  Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
  Helen at least a braver spouse might claim,
  Warm'd with some virtue, some regard of fame!
  Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline,
  With toils, sustain'd for Paris' sake and mine
  The gods have link'd our miserable doom,
  Our present woe, and infamy to come:
  Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long,
  Example sad! and theme of future song."

  The chief replied: "This time forbids to rest;
  The Trojan bands, by hostile fury press'd,
  Demand their Hector, and his arm require;
  The combat urges, and my soul's on fire.
  Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
  And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
  Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
  My wife, my infant, claim a moment's stay;
  This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
  Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
  This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
  May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand."

  He said, and pass'd with sad presaging heart
  To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part;
  At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
  She, with one maid of all her menial train,
  Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
  Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
  Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
  There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
  Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

  But he who found not whom his soul desired,
  Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
  Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
  Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
  "Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
  Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
  To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
  To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
  Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
  She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
  Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
  Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
  The nurse attended with her infant boy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

  Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
  Swift through the town he trod his former way,
  Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
  And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
  With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
  His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
  (Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
  His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
  Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
  Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
  To this loved infant Hector gave the name
  Scamandrius, from Scamander's honour'd stream;
  Astyanax the Trojans call'd the boy,
  From his great father, the defence of Troy.
  Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resign'd
  To tender passions all his mighty mind;
  His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
  Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
  Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh,
  And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.

          [Illustration: THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.]

                  THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.


  "Too daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run?
  Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
  And think'st thou not how wretched we shall be,
  A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
  For sure such courage length of life denies,
  And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
  Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
  Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
  O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
  All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
  So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
  And end with sorrows as they first begun.
  No parent now remains my griefs to share,
  No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
  The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
  Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
  His fate compassion in the victor bred;
  Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
  His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
  And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
  Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn'd,
  The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn'd,
  Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
  A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

  "By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
  In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
  While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
  Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
  My mother lived to wear the victor's bands,
  The queen of Hippoplacia's sylvan lands:
  Redeem'd too late, she scarce beheld again
  Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
  When ah! oppress'd by life-consuming woe,
  She fell a victim to Diana's bow.

  "Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
  My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
  Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
  Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
  Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
  Oh, prove a husband's and a father's care!
  That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
  Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
  Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
  There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
  That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
  And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
  Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
  Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
  Let others in the field their arms employ,
  But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."

  The chief replied: "That post shall be my care,
  Not that alone, but all the works of war.
  How would the sons of Troy, in arms renown'd,
  And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground
  Attaint the lustre of my former name,
  Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
  My early youth was bred to martial pains,
  My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
  Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
  And guard my father's glories, and my own.

  "Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
  (How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
  The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
  And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
  And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
  My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
  Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
  Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
  As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:
  I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
  In Argive looms our battles to design,
  And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
  To bear the victor's hard commands, or bring
  The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
  There while you groan beneath the load of life,
  They cry, 'Behold the mighty Hector's wife!'
  Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
  Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
  The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
  A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
  May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
  Press'd with a load of monumental clay!
  Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
  Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."

  Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
  Stretch'd his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
  The babe clung crying to his nurse's breast,
  Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
  With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
  And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
  The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
  And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;
  Then kiss'd the child, and, lifting high in air,
  Thus to the gods preferr'd a father's prayer:

  "O thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne,
  And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
  Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
  To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
  Against his country's foes the war to wage,
  And rise the Hector of the future age!
  So when triumphant from successful toils
  Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
  Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
  And say, 'This chief transcends his father's fame:'
  While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
  His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

  He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
  Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
  Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
  Hush'd to repose, and with a smile survey'd.
  The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
  She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
  The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
  And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

  "Andromache! my soul's far better part,
  Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
  No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
  Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
  Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
  And such the hard condition of our birth:
  No force can then resist, no flight can save,
  All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
  No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
  Me glory summons to the martial scene,
  The field of combat is the sphere for men.
  Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
  The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
  His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
  His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
  Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
  That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
  Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
  There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
  Through all her train the soft infection ran;
  The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
  And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

  But now, no longer deaf to honour's call,
  Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
  In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
  Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
  The wanton courser thus with reins unbound(176)
  Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
  Pamper'd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
  And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
  His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies;
  He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
  With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
  In arms refulgent as the god of day,
  The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
  Rush'd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

  And now, the warriors passing on the way,
  The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
  To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
  "O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
  Thy power in war with justice none contest;
  Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess'd.
  What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,
  Or godlike Paris live a woman's slave!
  My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,
  And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away.
  Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,
  For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
  These ills shall cease, whene'er by Jove's decree
  We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty:
  While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns,
  And Greece indignant through her seas returns."

                    [Illustration: BOWS AND BOW CASE.]

                            BOWS AND BOW CASE.


                          [Illustration: IRIS.]

                                  IRIS.





BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT

THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.

The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector, Minerva
is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her descend from
Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put off the general
engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a
single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is
cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after several attacks, are parted
by the night. The Trojans calling a council, Antenor purposes the delivery
of Helen to the Greeks, to which Paris will not consent, but offers to
restore them her riches. Priam sends a herald to make this offer, and to
demand a truce for burning the dead, the last of which only is agreed to
by Agamemnon. When the funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the
advice of Nestor, erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp,
flanked with towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune
testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from
Jupiter. Both armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens
the Trojans with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.

The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the
next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites of
the slain and one more in building the fortification before the ships. So
that somewhat about three days is employed in this book. The scene lies
wholly in the field.

  So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Then rush'd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
  Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms;
  Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
  As when to sailors labouring through the main,
  That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
  Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
  The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
  So welcome these to Troy's desiring train,
  The bands are cheer'd, the war awakes again.

  Bold Paris first the work of death begun
  On great Menestheus, Areithous' son,
  Sprung from the fair Philomeda's embrace,
  The pleasing Arne was his native place.
  Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
  Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow(177)
  Full on his neck, from Hector's weighty hand;
  And roll'd, with limbs relax'd, along the land.
  By Glaucus' spear the bold Iphmous bleeds,
  Fix'd in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
  Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound,
  Drop the cold useless members on the ground.

  When now Minerva saw her Argives slain,
  From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain
  Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight,
  Nor shot less swift from Ilion's towery height.
  Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;
  When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid:

  "What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
  Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
  Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
  To give to Greece the long divided day?
  Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,
  Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate;
  This day, the business of the field suspend;
  War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;
  Since vengeful goddesses confederate join
  To raze her walls, though built by hands divine."

  To whom the progeny of Jove replies:
  "I left, for this, the council of the skies:
  But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,
  What art shall calm the furious sons of war?"
  To her the god: "Great Hector's soul incite
  To dare the boldest Greek to single fight,
  Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show
  A warrior worthy to be Hector's foe."

  At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;
  Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew;
  Hector, inspired, he sought: to him address'd,
  Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast:
  "O son of Priam! let thy faithful ear
  Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear!
  Go forth persuasive, and a while engage
  The warring nations to suspend their rage;
  Then dare the boldest of the hostile train
  To mortal combat on the listed plain.
  For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
  The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate."

  He said: the warrior heard the word with joy;
  Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
  Held by the midst athwart. On either hand
  The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand;
  Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:
  They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
  The Athenian maid, and glorious god of day,(178)
  With silent joy the settling hosts survey:
  In form of vultures, on the beech's height
  They sit conceal'd, and wait the future fight.

  The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields,
  Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
  As when a general darkness veils the main,
  (Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat'ry plain,)
  The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,
  And a still horror saddens all the deeps;
  Thus in thick orders settling wide around,
  At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
  Great Hector first amidst both armies broke
  The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke:

  "Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
  What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
  Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
  O'erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
  War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
  Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
  You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
  'Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
  From all your troops select the boldest knight,
  And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
  Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
  Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
  But let my body, to my friends return'd,
  By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burn'd.
  And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
  Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust;
  If mine the glory to despoil the foe;
  On Phoebus' temple I'll his arms bestow:
  The breathless carcase to your navy sent,
  Greece on the shore shall raise a monument;
  Which when some future mariner surveys,
  Wash'd by broad Hellespont's resounding seas,
  Thus shall he say, 'A valiant Greek lies there,
  By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,'
  The stone shall tell your vanquish'd hero's name.
  And distant ages learn the victor's fame."

  This fierce defiance Greece astonish'd heard,
  Blush'd to refuse, and to accept it fear'd.
  Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
  And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

  "Women of Greece! O scandal of your race,
  Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
  How great the shame, when every age shall know
  That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
  Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
  A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
  Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
  Myself will dare the danger of the day;
  'Tis man's bold task the generous strife to try,
  But in the hands of God is victory."

  These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  His manly limbs in azure arms he dress'd.
  That day, Atrides! a superior hand
  Had stretch'd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
  But all at once, thy fury to compose,
  The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
  Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press'd
  Thy daring hand, and this advice address'd:
  "Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
  And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
  Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
  Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine:
  Even fierce Achilles learn'd its force to fear,
  And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
  Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
  Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
  The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
  Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
  Content the doubtful honour might forego,
  So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

  He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
  He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
  No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
  His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

  He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
  Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
  Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
  How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
  Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
  What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll'd,
  O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
  Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
  Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
  Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
  Each name, each action, and each hero's sire!
  Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
  And trembling all before one hostile hand;
  How would he lift his aged arms on high,
  Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
  Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove!
  Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
  And give this arm the spring which once it knew
  When fierce in war, where Jardan's waters fall,
  I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
  And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
  Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.(179)
  There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
  Proud Areithous' dreadful arms to wield;
  Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
  By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
  No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
  But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
  Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
  Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
  Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
  Nor aught the warrior's thundering mace avail'd.
  Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
  Had given the vanquish'd, now the victor bore:
  But when old age had dimm'd Lycurgus' eyes,
  To Ereuthalion he consign'd the prize.
  Furious with this he crush'd our levell'd bands,
  And dared the trial of the strongest hands;
  Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay:
  All saw, and fear'd, his huge tempestuous sway
  Till I, the youngest of the host, appear'd,
  And, youngest, met whom all our army fear'd.
  I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crown'd:
  Prone fell the giant o'er a length of ground.
  What then I was, O were your Nestor now!
  Not Hector's self should want an equal foe.
  But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,
  The flower of Greece, the examples of our host,
  Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway,
  Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?"

  His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame;
  And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,
  Up-started fierce: but far before the rest
  The king of men advanced his dauntless breast:
  Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appear'd;
  And next his bulk gigantic Ajax rear'd;
  Oileus follow'd; Idomen was there,(180)
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war:
  With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,
  And wise Ulysses closed the daring band.
  All these, alike inspired with noble rage,
  Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage:

  "Lest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,
  What chief shall combat, let the gods decide.
  Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise
  His country's fame, his own immortal praise."

  The lots produced, each hero signs his own:
  Then in the general's helm the fates are thrown,(181)
  The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands,
  And vows like these ascend from all the bands:
  "Grant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,
  A worthy champion for the Grecian state:
  This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,
  Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove."
  Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,
  Leap'd forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
  This from the right to left the herald bears,
  Held out in order to the Grecian peers;
  Each to his rival yields the mark unknown,
  Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;
  Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes,
  Then casts before him, and with transport cries:

  "Warriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy;
  Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
  Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest,
  To Saturn's son be all your vows address'd:
  But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,
  And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
  Said I in secret? No, your vows declare
  In such a voice as fills the earth and air,
  Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?
  Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
  From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,
  And, born to combats, fear no force on earth."

  He said. The troops with elevated eyes,
  Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies:
  "O father of mankind, superior lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored:
  Who in the highest heaven hast fix'd thy throne,
  Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:
  Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away
  The praise and conquest of this doubtful day;
  Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care,
  That both may claim it, and that both may share."

  Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on;
  Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:
  He moves to combat with majestic pace;
  So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,(182)
  When Jove to punish faithless men prepares,
  And gives whole nations to the waste of wars,
  Thus march'd the chief, tremendous as a god;
  Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:(183)
  His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
  He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band.
  Through every Argive heart new transport ran;
  All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
  Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppress'd,
  Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:
  'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
  Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

  Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
  As from a brazen tower, o'erlook'd the field.
  Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
  Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
  (The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
  And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
  This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
  And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

  "Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
  What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
  Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
  Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
  Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
  Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
  Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
  Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
  No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

  "O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
  (To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
  Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
  New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
  Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
  To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
  I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
  Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
  To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
  And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
  But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
  I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

  He said, and rising, high above the field
  Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
  Full on the brass descending from above
  Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
  Till in the seventh it fix'd. Then Ajax threw;
  Through Hector's shield the forceful javelin flew,
  His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
  Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
  From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew,
  Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;
  Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood,
  Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
  At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends;
  The blunted point against the buckler bends;
  But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near,
  Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear;
  It reach'd his neck, with matchless strength impell'd!
  Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield.
  Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down,
  In his strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone,
  Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he bends;
  Full on the brazen boss the stone descends;
  The hollow brass resounded with the shock:
  Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock,
  Applied each nerve, and swinging round on high,
  With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly;
  The huge stone thundering through his buckler broke:
  His slacken'd knees received the numbing stroke;
  Great Hector falls extended on the field,
  His bulk supporting on the shatter'd shield:
  Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apollo's might
  Confirm'd his sinews, and restored to fight.
  And now both heroes their broad falchions drew
  In flaming circles round their heads they flew;
  But then by heralds' voice the word was given.
  The sacred ministers of earth and heaven:
  Divine Talthybius, whom the Greeks employ.
  And sage Idaeus on the part of Troy,
  Between the swords their peaceful sceptres rear'd;
  And first Idaeus' awful voice was heard:

        [Illustration: HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.]

                HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.


  "Forbear, my sons! your further force to prove,
  Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove.
  To either host your matchless worth is known,
  Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.
  But now the Night extends her awful shade;
  The goddess parts you; be the night obey'd."(184)

  To whom great Ajax his high soul express'd:
  "O sage! to Hector be these words address'd.
  Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight,
  Let him demand the sanction of the night;
  If first he ask'd it, I content obey,
  And cease the strife when Hector shows the way."

  "O first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoin'd)
  Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind,
  With strength of body, and with worth of mind!
  Now martial law commands us to forbear;
  Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war,
  Some future day shall lengthen out the strife,
  And let the gods decide of death or life!
  Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade,
  And heaven enjoins it, be the night obey'd.
  Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian friends,
  And joy the nations whom thy arm defends;
  As I shall glad each chief, and Trojan wife,
  Who wearies heaven with vows for Hector's life.
  But let us, on this memorable day,
  Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say,
  'Not hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend;
  And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.'"

  With that, a sword with stars of silver graced,
  The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased,
  He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestow'd
  A radiant belt that rich with purple glow'd.
  Then with majestic grace they quit the plain;
  This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.

  The Trojan bands returning Hector wait,
  And hail with joy the Champion of their state;
  Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round,
  Alive, unarm'd, and vigorous from his wound;
  To Troy's high gates the godlike man they bear
  Their present triumph, as their late despair.

  But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed,
  The well-arm'd Greeks to Agamemnon lead.
  A steer for sacrifice the king design'd,
  Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.
  The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide,
  The beast they quarter, and the joints divide;
  Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
  Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
  The king himself (an honorary sign)
  Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.(185)
  When now the rage of hunger was removed,
  Nestor, in each persuasive art approved,
  The sage whose counsels long had sway'd the rest,
  In words like these his prudent thought express'd:

  "How dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost,
  What Greeks are perish'd! what a people lost!
  What tides of blood have drench'd Scamander's shore!
  What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!
  Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrow's light
  Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight:
  Some space at least permit the war to breathe,
  While we to flames our slaughter'd friends bequeath,
  From the red field their scatter'd bodies bear,
  And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear;
  So decent urns their snowy bones may keep,
  And pious children o'er their ashes weep.
  Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed,
  High o'er them all a general tomb be raised;
  Next, to secure our camp and naval powers,
  Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;
  From space to space be ample gates around,
  For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
  So Greece to combat shall in safety go,
  Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe."
  'Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;
  The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.

  Meanwhile, convened at Priam's palace-gate,
  The Trojan peers in nightly council sate;
  A senate void of order, as of choice:
  Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
  Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
  'Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires,
  And I but move what every god requires:
  Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
  And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
  The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke,
  Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
  As this advice ye practise, or reject,
  So hope success, or dread the dire effect."

  The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied
  The graceful husband of the Spartan bride:
  "Cold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years
  But sound ungrateful in a warrior's ears:
  Old man, if void of fallacy or art,
  Thy words express the purpose of thy heart,
  Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;
  But wisdom has its date, assign'd by heaven.
  Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!
  Their treasures I'll restore, but not the dame;
  My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;
  But be this bright possession ever mine."

  'Twas then, the growing discord to compose,
  Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose:
  His godlike aspect deep attention drew:
  He paused, and these pacific words ensue:

  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
  Now take refreshment as the hour demands;
  Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
  Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
  Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent,
  Before their ships proclaim my son's intent.
  Next let a truce be ask'd, that Troy may burn
  Her slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn;
  That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

  The monarch spoke: the warriors snatch'd with haste
  (Each at his post in arms) a short repast.
  Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day,
  To the black ships Idaeus bent his way;
  There, to the sons of Mars, in council found,
  He raised his voice: the host stood listening round.

  "Ye sons of Atreus, and ye Greeks, give ear!
  The words of Troy, and Troy's great monarch, hear.
  Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)
  What Paris, author of the war, declares.
  The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore
  (Oh had he perish'd ere they touch'd our shore!)
  He proffers injured Greece: with large increase
  Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
  But to restore the beauteous bride again,
  This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
  Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn
  Our slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn.
  That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

  The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke;
  At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:
  "Oh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame,
  Their proffer'd wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
  Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,
  And Troy already totters to her fall."

  The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,
  With general shouts return'd him loud acclaim.
  Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace:
  "Herald! in him thou hear'st the voice of Greece
  For what remains; let funeral flames be fed
  With heroes' corps: I war not with the dead:
  Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,
  And gratify the manes of the slain.
  Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!"
  He said, and rear'd his sceptre to the sky.

  To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay
  To wait the event, the herald bent his way.
  He came, and standing in the midst, explain'd
  The peace rejected, but the truce obtain'd.
  Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,
  Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:
  Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore,
  Hew'd the green forests, and the bodies bore.
  And now from forth the chambers of the main,
  To shed his sacred light on earth again,
  Arose the golden chariot of the day,
  And tipp'd the mountains with a purple ray.
  In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train
  Through heaps of carnage search'd the mournful plain.
  Scarce could the friend his slaughter'd friend explore,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deformed with gore.
  The wounds they wash'd, their pious tears they shed,
  And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.
  Sage Priam check'd their grief: with silent haste
  The bodies decent on the piles were placed:
  With melting hearts the cold remains they burn'd,
  And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy return'd.
  Nor less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed,
  And decent on the pile dispose the dead;
  The cold remains consume with equal care;
  And slowly, sadly, to their fleet repair.
  Now, ere the morn had streak'd with reddening light
  The doubtful confines of the day and night,
  About the dying flames the Greeks appear'd,
  And round the pile a general tomb they rear'd.
  Then, to secure the camp and naval powers,
  They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:(186)
  From space to space were ample gates around,
  For passing chariots, and a trench profound
  Of large extent; and deep in earth below,
  Strong piles infix'd stood adverse to the foe.

  So toil'd the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above,
  In shining circle round their father Jove,
  Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man:
  Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began:

  "What mortals henceforth shall our power adore,
  Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore,
  If the proud Grecians thus successful boast
  Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?
  See the long walls extending to the main,
  No god consulted, and no victim slain!
  Their fame shall fill the world's remotest ends,
  Wide as the morn her golden beam extends;
  While old Laomedon's divine abodes,
  Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods,
  Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep."
  Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.

  The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies,
  That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies:
  "Strong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make
  The solid earth's eternal basis shake!
  What cause of fear from mortal works could move(187)
  The meanest subject of our realms above?
  Where'er the sun's refulgent rays are cast,
  Thy power is honour'd, and thy fame shall last.
  But yon proud work no future age shall view,
  No trace remain where once the glory grew.
  The sapp'd foundations by thy force shall fall,
  And, whelm'd beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:
  Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore:
  The ruin vanish'd, and the name no more."

  Thus they in heaven: while, o'er the Grecian train,
  The rolling sun descending to the main
  Beheld the finish'd work. Their bulls they slew;
  Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
  And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos' strands,
  With Bacchus' blessings cheered the generous bands.
  Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent
  A thousant measures to the royal tent.
  (Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore
  To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
  The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
  And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
  Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave;(188)
  Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
  All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
  Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
  But Jove averse the signs of wrath display'd,
  And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
  Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
  While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
  Each pour'd to Jove before the bowl was crown'd;
  And large libations drench'd the thirsty ground:
  Then late, refresh'd with sleep from toils of fight,
  Enjoy'd the balmy blessings of the night.

               [Illustration: GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.]

                       GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.





BOOK VIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.

Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the
pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of him
that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.(189) his balances the
fates of both, and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings.
Nestor alone continues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him;
whose exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described. Juno
endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in
vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by Hector, and carried
off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are restrained by
Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to the battle. Hector
continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to their fortifications
before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the watch all night in the
camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and escaping by flight. They
kindle fires through all the fields, and pass the night under arms.

The time of seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of the poem
to the end of this book. The scene here (except of the celestial machines)
lies in the field towards the seashore.

  Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn,
  Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn;
  When Jove convened the senate of the skies,
  Where high Olympus' cloudy tops arise,
  The sire of gods his awful silence broke;
  The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke:

  "Celestial states! immortal gods! give ear,
  Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear;
  The fix'd decree which not all heaven can move;
  Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve!
  What god but enters yon forbidden field,
  Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,
  Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven,
  Gash'd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven;
  Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown,
  Low in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan,
  With burning chains fix'd to the brazen floors,
  And lock'd by hell's inexorable doors;
  As deep beneath the infernal centre hurl'd,(190)
  As from that centre to the ethereal world.
  Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes:
  And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.
  League all your forces, then, ye powers above,
  Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.
  Let down our golden everlasting chain(191)
  Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main
  Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth,
  To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth
  Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand,
  I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land;
  I fix the chain to great Olympus' height,
  And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight!
  For such I reign, unbounded and above;
  And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove."

  The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply:
  A reverend horror silenced all the sky;
  Trembling they stood before their sovereign's look;
  At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke:

  "O first and greatest! God, by gods adored
  We own thy might, our father and our lord!
  But, ah! permit to pity human state:
  If not to help, at least lament their fate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain;
  Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move,
  Or all must perish in the wrath of Jove."

  The cloud-compelling god her suit approved,
  And smiled superior on his best beloved;
  Then call'd his coursers, and his chariot took;
  The stedfast firmament beneath them shook:
  Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot roll'd;
  Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold:
  Of heaven's undrossy gold the gods array,
  Refulgent, flash'd intolerable day.
  High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly
  Between the extended earth and starry sky.
  But when to Ida's topmost height he came,
  (Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,)
  Where o'er her pointed summits proudly raised,
  His fane breathed odours, and his altar blazed:
  There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire
  Of gods and men released the steeds of fire:
  Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;
  High on the cloudy point his seat he placed;
  Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys,
  The town, and tents, and navigable seas.

  Now had the Grecians snatch'd a short repast,
  And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
  Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day
  The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
  Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain:
  Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound;
  And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
  To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
  Victors and vanquish'd join promiscuous cries,
  Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
  Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
  The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,(192)
  With equal hand: in these explored the fate
  Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
  Press'd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
  Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
  Then Jove from Ida's top his horrors spreads;
  The clouds burst dreadful o'er the Grecian heads;
  Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
  Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
  Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
  The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
  Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
  Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
  Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustain'd
  Nestor alone, amidst the storm remain'd.
  Unwilling he remain'd, for Paris' dart
  Had pierced his courser in a mortal part;
  Fix'd in the forehead, where the springing man
  Curl'd o'er the brow, it stung him to the brain;
  Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear,
  Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
  Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed
  The encumber'd chariot from the dying steed,
  When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,
  Pour'd to the tumult on his whirling car.
  That day had stretch'd beneath his matchless hand
  The hoary monarch of the Pylian band,
  But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd
  He rush'd, and on Ulysses call'd aloud:

  "Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
  Oh, flight unworthy great Laertes' son!
  Mix'd with the vulgar shall thy fate be found,
  Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?
  Oh turn and save from Hector's direful rage
  The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage."
  His fruitless words are lost unheard in air,
  Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
  But bold Tydides to the rescue goes,
  A single warrior midst a host of foes;
  Before the coursers with a sudden spring
  He leap'd, and anxious thus bespoke the king:

  "Great perils, father! wait the unequal fight;
  These younger champions will oppress thy might.
  Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow,
  Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow.
  Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the car
  Observe the steeds of Tros, renown'd in war.
  Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
  To dare the fight, or urge the rapid race:
  These late obey'd Cneas' guiding rein;
  Leave thou thy chariot to our faithful train;
  With these against yon Trojans will we go,
  Nor shall great Hector want an equal foe;
  Fierce as he is, even he may learn to fear
  The thirsty fury of my flying spear."

  Thus said the chief; and Nestor, skill'd in war,
  Approves his counsel, and ascends the car:
  The steeds he left, their trusty servants hold;
  Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:
  The reverend charioteer directs the course,
  And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.
  Hector they face; unknowing how to fear,
  Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl'd his spear.
  The spear with erring haste mistook its way,
  But plunged in Eniopeus' bosom lay.
  His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;
  The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
  Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill'd,
  Yet unrevenged permits to press the field;
  Till, to supply his place and rule the car,
  Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
  And now had death and horror cover'd all;(193)
  Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall
  Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound
  Roll'd the big thunder o'er the vast profound:
  Full in Tydides' face the lightning flew;
  The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue;
  The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;
  And Nestor's trembling hand confess'd his fright:
  He dropp'd the reins: and, shook with sacred dread,
  Thus, turning, warn'd the intrepid Diomed:

  "O chief! too daring in thy friend's defence
  Retire advised, and urge the chariot hence.
  This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies
  Assists great Hector, and our palm denies.
  Some other sun may see the happier hour,
  When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power.
  'Tis not in man his fix'd decree to move:
  The great will glory to submit to Jove."

  "O reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies)
  Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast
  I fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
  Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
  O'erwhelm me, earth; and hide a warrior's shame!"
  To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:(194)
  "Gods! can thy courage fear the Phrygian's pride?
  Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast?
  Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host,
  Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost;
  Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword
  That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord."
  He said, and, hasty, o'er the gasping throng
  Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along;
  The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind;
  The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.
  Then with a voice that shakes the solid skies,
  Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies.
  "Go, mighty hero! graced above the rest
  In seats of council and the sumptuous feast:
  Now hope no more those honours from thy train;
  Go less than woman, in the form of man!
  To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,
  To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames,
  Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;
  This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead."

  Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
  To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;
  Thrice turn'd the chief, and thrice imperial Jove
  On Ida's summits thunder'd from above.
  Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light,
  (The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:

  "Hear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,
  All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
  Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,
  Your great forefathers' glories, and your own.
  Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame
  Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame.
  In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,
  Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
  High o'er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound,
  And pass victorious o'er the levell'd mound.
  Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand,
  Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;
  Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,
  All Greece, encompass'd, in one blaze expires."

  Furious he said; then bending o'er the yoke,
  Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke:

  "Now, Xanthus, Cthon, Lampus, urge the chase,
  And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;
  Be fleet, be fearless, this important day,
  And all your master's well-spent care repay.
  For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand,
  Served with pure wheat, and by a princess' hand;
  For this my spouse, of great Aetion's line,
  So oft has steep'd the strengthening grain in wine.
  Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll'd:
  Give me to seize rich Nestor's shield of gold;
  From Tydeus' shoulders strip the costly load,
  Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god:
  These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!
  This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!"

  That heard, deep anguish stung Saturnia's soul;
  She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole:
  And thus to Neptune: "Thou, whose force can make
  The stedfast earth from her foundations shake,
  Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppress'd,
  Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast?
  Yet Cgae, Helice, thy power obey,(195)
  And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay.
  Would all the deities of Greece combine,
  In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine:
  Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,
  And see his Trojans to the shades descend:
  Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;
  Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!"

  Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:
  "What rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
  I war not with the highest. All above
  Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove."

  Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might
  Jove gave the glory of the destined fight,
  Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields
  With close-ranged chariots, and with thicken'd shields.
  Where the deep trench in length extended lay,
  Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,
  A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat
  With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
  The king of men, by Juno's self inspired,
  Toil'd through the tents, and all his army fired.
  Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand
  His purple robe, bright ensign of command.
  High on the midmost bark the king appear'd:
  There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard:
  To Ajax and Achilles reach'd the sound,
  Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
  "O Argives! shame of human race! (he cried:
  The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)
  Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore,
  Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
  Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes,
  While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
  But who to meet one martial man is found,
  When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
  O mighty Jove! O sire of the distress'd!
  Was ever king like me, like me oppress'd?
  With power immense, with justice arm'd in vain;
  My glory ravish'd, and my people slain!
  To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
  What altar smoked not with our victims' gore?
  With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
  And ask'd destruction to the Trojan name.
  Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
  Give these at least to 'scape from Hector's hand,
  And save the relics of the Grecian land!"

  Thus pray'd the king, and heaven's great father heard
  His vows, in bitterness of soul preferr'd:
  The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,
  And gives the people to their monarch's prayers.
  His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent,
  A fawn his talons truss'd, (divine portent!)
  High o'er the wondering hosts he soar'd above,
  Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;
  Then let the prey before his altar fall;
  The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:
  Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive,
  And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
  Tydides first, of all the Grecian force,
  O'er the broad ditch impell'd his foaming horse,
  Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,
  And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
  Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)
  With flying coursers shunn'd his dreadful ire;
  Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppress'd;
  The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:
  Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound;
  His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
  Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed;
  The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed:
  Meriones, like Mars in arms renown'd,
  And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound;
  Evaemon's son next issues to the foe,
  And last young Teucer with his bended bow.
  Secure behind the Telamonian shield
  The skilful archer wide survey'd the field,
  With every shaft some hostile victim slew,
  Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew:
  The conscious infant so, when fear alarms,
  Retires for safety to the mother's arms.
  Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field,
  Moves as he moves, and turns the shining shield.
  Who first by Teucer's mortal arrows bled?
  Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead:
  The godlike Lycophon next press'd the plain,
  With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain:
  Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground;
  The bloody pile great Melanippus crown'd.
  Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art,
  A Trojan ghost attending every dart.
  Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye
  The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly:
  "O youth forever dear! (the monarch cried)
  Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried;
  Thy brave example shall retrieve our host,
  Thy country's saviour, and thy father's boast!
  Sprung from an alien's bed thy sire to grace,
  The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace:
  Proud of his boy, he own'd the generous flame,
  And the brave son repays his cares with fame.
  Now hear a monarch's vow: If heaven's high powers
  Give me to raze Troy's long-defended towers;
  Whatever treasures Greece for me design,
  The next rich honorary gift be thine:
  Some golden tripod, or distinguished car,
  With coursers dreadful in the ranks of war:
  Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve,
  Shall recompense the warrior's toils with love."

  To this the chief: "With praise the rest inspire,
  Nor urge a soul already fill'd with fire.
  What strength I have, be now in battle tried,
  Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.
  Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe,
  Still aim'd at Hector have I bent my bow:
  Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled,
  And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead:
  But sure some god denies me to destroy
  This fury of the field, this dog of Troy."

  He said, and twang'd the string. The weapon flies
  At Hector's breast, and sings along the skies:
  He miss'd the mark; but pierced Gorgythio's heart,
  And drench'd in royal blood the thirsty dart.
  (Fair Castianira, nymph of form divine,
  This offspring added to king Priam's line.)
  As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,(196)
  Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain;
  So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depress'd
  Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast.
  Another shaft the raging archer drew,
  That other shaft with erring fury flew,
  (From Hector, Phoebus turn'd the flying wound,)
  Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground:
  Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore,
  And dipp'd its feathers in no vulgar gore.
  Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms
  The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
  Hector with grief his charioteer beheld
  All pale and breathless on the sanguine field:
  Then bids Cebriones direct the rein,
  Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain.
  Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took,
  And rush'd on Teucer with the lifted rock.
  The youth already strain'd the forceful yew;
  The shaft already to his shoulder drew;
  The feather in his hand, just wing'd for flight,
  Touch'd where the neck and hollow chest unite;
  There, where the juncture knits the channel bone,
  The furious chief discharged the craggy stone:
  The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,
  And his numb'd hand dismiss'd his useless bow.
  He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display'd,
  And screen'd his brother with the mighty shade;
  Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore
  The batter'd archer groaning to the shore.

  Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire,
  He arm'd their hands, and fill'd their breasts with fire.
  The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,
  Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
  First of the foe, great Hector march'd along,
  With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong.
  As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,
  With beating bosom, and with eager pace,
  Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,
  Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels;
  Thus oft the Grecians turn'd, but still they flew;
  Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
  When flying they had pass'd the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;
  Before the ships a desperate stand they made,
  And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
  Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:
  His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame
  That wither'd all their host: like Mars he stood:
  Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
  Their strong distress the wife of Jove survey'd;
  Then pensive thus, to war's triumphant maid:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
  Now, in this moment of her last despair,
  Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care,
  Condemn'd to suffer the full force of fate,
  And drain the dregs of heaven's relentless hate?
  Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
  What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
  What power divine shall Hector's wrath assuage?
  Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!"

  So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
  To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:

  "Long since had Hector stain'd these fields with gore,
  Stretch'd by some Argive on his native shore:
  But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands,
  Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands;
  The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,
  Forgets my service and deserved reward:
  Saved I, for this, his favourite son distress'd,
  By stern Eurystheus with long labours press'd?
  He begg'd, with tears he begg'd, in deep dismay;
  I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day.
  Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,
  When to grim Pluto's gloomy gates he went;
  The triple dog had never felt his chain,
  Nor Styx been cross'd, nor hell explored in vain.
  Averse to me of all his heaven of gods,
  At Thetis' suit the partial Thunderer nods;
  To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son,
  My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
  Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved
  To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.
  Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;
  Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side.
  Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?
  (That terror of the Greeks, that man of men)
  When Juno's self, and Pallas shall appear,
  All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
  What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,
  Expiring, pale, and terrible no more,
  Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?"

  She ceased, and Juno rein'd the steeds with care:
  (Heaven's awful empress, Saturn's other heir:)
  Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,
  With flowers adorn'd, with art immortal crown'd;
  The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove
  Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.
  Her father's arms her mighty limbs invest,
  His cuirass blazes on her ample breast.
  The vigorous power the trembling car ascends:
  Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends:
  Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns
  Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

  Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly;
  Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
  Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,
  Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.
  Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
  The sun's bright portals and the skies command;
  Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day
  Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.
  The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
  Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide.
  But Jove, incensed, from Ida's top survey'd,
  And thus enjoin'd the many-colour'd maid.

       [Illustration: JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.]

               JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.


  "Thaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car;
  Against the highest who shall wage the war?
  If furious yet they dare the vain debate,
  Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate:
  Their coursers crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
  Their car in fragments, scatter'd o'er the sky:
  My lightning these rebellious shall confound,
  And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground,
  Condemn'd for ten revolving years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall Minerva learn to fear our ire,
  Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress our will."

  Swift as the wind, the various-colour'd maid
  From Ida's top her golden wings display'd;
  To great Olympus' shining gate she flies,
  There meets the chariot rushing down the skies,
  Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,
  And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.

  "What frenzy goddesses! what rage can move
  Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
  Desist, obedient to his high command:
  This is his word; and know his word shall stand:
  His lightning your rebellion shall confound,
  And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;
  Your horses crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
  Your car in fragments scatter'd o'er the sky;
  Yourselves condemn'd ten rolling years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,
  Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
  For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
  She claims some title to transgress his will:
  But thee, what desperate insolence has driven
  To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?"

  Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind,
  She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign'd:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
  No more let beings of superior birth
  Contend with Jove for this low race of earth;
  Triumphant now, now miserably slain,
  They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:
  But Jove's high counsels full effect shall find;
  And, ever constant, ever rule mankind."

  She spoke, and backward turn'd her steeds of light,
  Adorn'd with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
  The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,
  And heap'd their mangers with ambrosial food.
  There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;
  The chariot propp'd against the crystal walls,
  The pensive goddesses, abash'd, controll'd,
  Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.

       [Illustration: THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.]

               THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.


  And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
  From Ida's summits to the Olympian height.
  Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
  Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
  'Twas Neptune's charge his coursers to unbrace,
  And fix the car on its immortal base;
  There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
  Till with a snowy veil he screen'd the blaze.
  He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
  The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
  High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
  And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
  Trembling afar the offending powers appear'd,
  Confused and silent, for his frown they fear'd.
  He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
  "Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
  Soon was your battle o'er: proud Troy retired
  Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
  But know, whoe'er almighty power withstand!
  Unmatch'd our force, unconquer'd is our hand:
  Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
  Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
  Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
  And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
  For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
  What power soe'er provokes our lifted hand,
  On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
  Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race."

  Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
  But feast their souls on Ilion's woes to come.
  Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
  The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress'd;
  But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
  "What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
  Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
  'Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
  For Greece we grieve, abandon'd by her fate
  To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
  From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
  With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
  Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
  Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove."

  The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
  Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

  "The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
  Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
  What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
  Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
  Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
  The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
  Even till the day when certain fates ordain
  That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
  Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
  For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
  With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
  Fly, if thy wilt, to earth's remotest bound,
  Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
  Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
  Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
  No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there;
  No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
  There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
  And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand."

  Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
  And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
  The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay'd;
  The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

  The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
  A martial council near the navy walls;
  These to Scamander's bank apart he led,
  Where thinly scatter'd lay the heaps of dead.
  The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
  Attend his order, and their prince surround.
  A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length;
  The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
  Fix'd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
  The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
  And, bending forward, thus reveal'd his mind:

  "Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
  Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
  This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
  Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
  But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
  And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
  Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
  Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
  Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
  And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought
  Wide o'er the field, high blazing to the sky,
  Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
  The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
  Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
  Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
  Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
  Not unmolested let the wretches gain
  Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
  Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
  Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
  Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses' care.
  And warn their children from a Trojan war.
  Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
  Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
  To bid the sires with hoary honours crown'd,
  And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
  Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
  And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
  Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
  The insidious foe the naked town invade.
  Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;
  A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
  The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector's hand
  From these detested foes to free the land,
  Who plough'd, with fates averse, the watery way:
  For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
  Our common safety must be now the care;
  But soon as morning paints the fields of air,
  Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage,
  And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
  Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove
  Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
  To-morrow's light (O haste the glorious morn!)
  Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,
  With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored,
  And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
  Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,
  From age inglorious, and black death secure;
  So might my life and glory know no bound,
  Like Pallas worshipp'd, like the sun renown'd!
  As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,
  Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy."

  The leader spoke. From all his host around
  Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
  Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
  And fix'd their headstalls to his chariot-side.
  Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led,
  With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,
  Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore:
  The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
  Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers!(197)
  Whose wrath hung heavy o'er the Trojan towers:
  Nor Priam nor his sons obtain'd their grace;
  Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.

  The troops exulting sat in order round,
  And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
  As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,(198)
  O'er heaven's pure azure spreads her sacred light,
  When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
  And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene,
  Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
  And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,
  O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
  And tip with silver every mountain's head:
  Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
  A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:
  The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
  Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
  So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,
  And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
  The long reflections of the distant fires
  Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
  A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild,
  And shoot a shady lustre o'er the field.
  Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend,
  Whose umber'd arms, by fits, thick flashes send,
  Loud neigh the coursers o'er their heaps of corn,
  And ardent warriors wait the rising morn.

                 [Illustration: THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.]

                         THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES.





BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.

THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.

Agamemnon, after the last day's defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit the
siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to be
strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are to be
followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and Nestor
further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in order to
move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are
accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very moving and
pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by Achilles, who
notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The ambassadors return
unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.

This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, which
is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene lies on
the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.

  Thus joyful Troy maintain'd the watch of night;
  While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,(199)
  And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
  Sat on each face, and sadden'd every heart.
  As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
  A double tempest of the west and north
  Swells o'er the sea, from Thracia's frozen shore,
  Heaps waves on waves, and bids the Cgean roar:
  This way and that the boiling deeps are toss'd:
  Such various passions urged the troubled host,
  Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
  Superior sorrows swell'd his royal breast;
  Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
  To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
  But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
  In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
  The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
  Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
  So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
  In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
  With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress'd;
  Words, mix'd with sighs, thus bursting from his breast:

  "Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader's care;
  Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
  Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
  And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
  A safe return was promised to our toils,
  With conquest honour'd and enrich'd with spoils:
  Now shameful flight alone can save the host;
  Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
  So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
  Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,
  Who shakes the feeble props of human trust,
  And towers and armies humbles to the dust.
  Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
  Haste to the joys our native country yields;
  Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy."

  He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
  Silent, unmov'd in dire dismay they stand;
  A pensive scene! till Tydeus' warlike son
  Roll'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
  "When kings advise us to renounce our fame,
  First let him speak who first has suffer'd shame.
  If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
  The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
  Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
  Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
  Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear'd,
  The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
  The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
  The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
  They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
  They gave dominion o'er the seas and land;
  The noblest power that might the world control
  They gave thee not--a brave and virtuous soul.
  Is this a general's voice, that would suggest
  Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
  Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
  And if we fly, 'tis what our king commands.
  Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain;
  Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main;
  A noble care the Grecians shall employ,
  To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
  Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,
  Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire;
  Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;
  God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came."

  He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,
  And voice to voice resounds Tydides' praise.
  Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rear'd;
  He spoke: the host in still attention heard:(200)

  "O truly great! in whom the gods have join'd
  Such strength of body with such force of mind:
  In conduct, as in courage, you excel,
  Still first to act what you advise so well.
  These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves,
  Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
  Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:
  And blame even kings with praise, because with truth.
  And yet those years that since thy birth have run
  Would hardly style thee Nestor's youngest son.
  Then let me add what yet remains behind,
  A thought unfinish'd in that generous mind;
  Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring
  Distaste the people, or offend the king:

  "Cursed is the man, and void of law and right,
  Unworthy property, unworthy light,
  Unfit for public rule, or private care,
  That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
  Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
  To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
  This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
  Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
  Be that the duty of the young and bold;
  But thou, O king, to council call the old;
  Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
  Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
  With Thracian wines recruit thy honour'd guests,
  For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
  Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress'd,
  And such a monarch as can choose the best.
  See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
  How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
  Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
  What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
  This dreadful interval determines all;
  To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall."

  Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
  Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
  His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
  The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown'd:
  Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
  The double offspring of the warrior-god:
  Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
  And Lycomed of Creon's noble line.
  Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
  And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
  The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
  Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

  The king of men, on public counsels bent,
  Convened the princes in his ample tent,
  Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
  But stay'd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
  Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
  And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

  "Monarch of nations! whose superior sway
  Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
  The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
  And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
  O king! the counsels of my age attend;
  With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
  Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
  Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,
  To see no wholesome motion be withstood,
  And ratify the best for public good.
  Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
  But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
  Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
  At once my present judgment and my past.
  When from Pelides' tent you forced the maid,
  I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
  But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
  You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
  Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
  With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend."

  To whom the king. "With justice hast thou shown
  A prince's faults, and I with reason own.
  That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
  Is more than armies, and himself a host.
  Bless'd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
  Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
  Fain would my heart, which err'd through frantic rage,
  The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
  If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,(201)
  Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatch'd in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath the hero's arms:
  All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
  And join'd with these the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis I resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,(202)
  These instant shall be his; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass his loaded navy's sides:
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown his warm embrace,
  Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shall he live my son, our honours share,
  And with Orestes' self divide my care.
  Yet more--three daughters in my court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed;
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,(203)
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
  Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
  I ask no presents, no reward for love:
  Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
  Him Enope, and Pherae him obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus for vines renown'd;
  Cpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:(204)
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
  There shall he reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  All this I give, his vengeance to control,
  And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
  Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
  Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
  Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell's abodes,
  And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods
  Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
  Since more than his my years, and more my sway."

                          [Illustration: PLUTO.]

                                  PLUTO.


  The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
  "Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
  Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
  And such as fits a generous king to make.
  Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
  (Myself will name them) to Pelides' tent.
  Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age,
  Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
  Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
  Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
  Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
  Pray in deep silence,(205) and with purest hands."(206)

                 [Illustration: THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.]

                         THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


  He said; and all approved. The heralds bring
  The cleansing water from the living spring.
  The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown'd,
  And large libations drench'd the sands around.
  The rite perform'd, the chiefs their thirst allay,
  Then from the royal tent they take their way;
  Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye,
  Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;
  Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
  To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
  Through the still night they march, and hear the roar
  Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
  To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,
  Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround,
  They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,
  And calm the rage of stern Cacides.
  And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay
  The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay;
  Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
  Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
  (The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;
  Of polish'd silver was its costly frame.)
  With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
  The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
  Patroclus only of the royal train,
  Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
  Full opposite he sat, and listen'd long,
  In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
  Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds
  To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
  Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied,
  Leap'd from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
  With like surprise arose Menoetius' son:
  Pelides grasp'd their hands, and thus begun:

  "Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.
  Or strong necessity, or urgent fear;
  Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;
  To me more dear than all that bear the name."

  With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,
  And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
  Then thus--"Patroclus, crown a larger bowl,
  Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
  Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
  Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend."

  He said: Patroclus o'er the blazing fire
  Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
  The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
  Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
  Achilles at the genial feast presides,
  The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
  Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
  The tent is brighten'd with the rising blaze:
  Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
  He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
  Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
  And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Menoetius' son bestow'd;
  Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
  Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
  The first fat offering to the immortals due,
  Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
  Then each, indulging in the social feast,
  His thirst and hunger soberly repress'd.
  That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign:
  Not unperceived; Ulysses crown'd with wine
  The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
  His speech addressing to the godlike man.

  "Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
  Not those more honour'd whom Atrides feasts:
  Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
  That, Agamemnon's regal tent affords;
  But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
  Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
  What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
  The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
  Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
  And owns no help but from thy saving hands:
  Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;
  Their threatening tents already shade our wall:
  Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim,
  And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
  For them the father of the gods declares,
  Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
  See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
  See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
  What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
  He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
  The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
  Heavens! how my country's woes distract my mind,
  Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design'd!
  And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay
  In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
  Return, Achilles: oh return, though late,
  To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate;
  If in that heart or grief or courage lies,
  Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
  The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,
  That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain:
  Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
  Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
  When Peleus in his aged arms embraced
  His parting son, these accents were his last:

  "'My child! with strength, with glory, and success,
  Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
  Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage
  To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:
  From gentler manners let thy glory grow,
  And shun contention, the sure source of woe;
  That young and old may in thy praise combine,
  The virtues of humanity be thine--'
  This now-despised advice thy father gave;
  Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
  If thou wilt yield to great Atrides' prayers,
  Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares;
  If not--but hear me, while I number o'er
  The proffer'd presents, an exhaustless store.
  Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
  And twice ten vases of refulgent mould;
  Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
  Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
  Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force,
  And still victorious in the dusty course;
  (Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed
  The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
  Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
  Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
  The same he chose for more than vulgar charms,
  When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms.
  All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,
  And, join'd with these, the long-contested maid;
  With all her charms, Briseis he'll resign,
  And solemn swear those charms were only thine;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
  Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
  These instant shall be thine; and if the powers
  Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
  Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)
  With gold and brass thy loaded navy's sides.
  Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
  With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace;
  Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,
  Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
  Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
  If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
  There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
  And with Orestes' self divide his care.
  Yet more--three daughters in his court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed:
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
  Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve;
  He asks no presents, no reward for love:
  Himself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway,
  The Enope and Pherae thee obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown'd:
  Cpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main.
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
  There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
  Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
  But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
  If honour and if interest plead in vain,
  Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
  And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
  If no regard thy suffering country claim,
  Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
  For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
  Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
  Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
  And only triumphs to deserve thy hands."

  Then thus the goddess-born: "Ulysses, hear
  A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
  What in my secret soul is understood,
  My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
  Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
  Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
  Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
  My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

  "Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
  Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
  Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
  But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
  Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
  The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
  Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
  Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
  Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
  A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
  As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
  From danger guards them, and from want defends;
  In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
  And with the untasted food supplies her care:
  For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
  Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
  Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
  And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
  I sack'd twelve ample cities on the main,(207)
  And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
  Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
  The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
  Your mighty monarch these in peace possess'd;
  Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
  Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
  And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
  I only must refund, of all his train;
  See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
  My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
  My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
  The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
  But what's the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
  What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
  What calls for vengeance but a woman's cause?
  Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
  Beloved by none but those of Atreus' race?
  The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
  Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
  Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
  Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
  Wrong'd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
  Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
  Ye have my answer--what remains to do,
  Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
  What needs he the defence this arm can make?
  Has he not walls no human force can shake?
  Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
  With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
  And will not these (the wonders he has done)
  Repel the rage of Priam's single son?
  There was a time ('twas when for Greece I fought)
  When Hector's prowess no such wonders wrought;
  He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
  Achilles' fury at the Scaean gate;
  He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
  But now those ancient enmities are o'er;
  To-morrow we the favouring gods implore;
  Then shall you see our parting vessels crown'd,
  And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
  The third day hence shall Pthia greet our sails,(208)
  If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;
  Pthia to her Achilles shall restore
  The wealth he left for this detested shore:
  Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass,
  The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:
  My beauteous captives thither I'll convey,
  And all that rests of my unravish'd prey.
  One only valued gift your tyrant gave,
  And that resumed--the fair Lyrnessian slave.
  Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
  And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear;
  (For arm'd in impudence, mankind he braves,
  And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
  Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes
  Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;)
  Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
  Nor share his council, nor his battle join;
  For once deceiv'd, was his; but twice were mine,
  No--let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives
  Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives;
  His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind
  Stand but as slaves before a noble mind,
  Not though he proffer'd all himself possess'd,
  And all his rapine could from others wrest:
  Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown
  The many-peopled Orchomenian town;(209)
  Not all proud Thebes' unrivall'd walls contain,
  The world's great empress on the Egyptian plain
  (That spreads her conquests o'er a thousand states,
  And pours her heroes through a hundred gates,
  Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars
  From each wide portal issuing to the wars);(210)
  Though bribes were heap'd on bribes, in number more
  Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
  Should all these offers for my friendship call,
  'Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
  Atrides' daughter never shall be led
  (An ill-match'd consort) to Achilles' bed;
  Like golden Venus though she charm'd the heart,
  And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
  Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
  I hate alliance with a tyrant's race.
  If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
  The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
  Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
  And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
  Bless'd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
  Content with just hereditary sway;
  There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
  Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
  Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
  Not all Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
  Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
  Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
  Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
  And steeds unrivall'd on the dusty plain:
  But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
  Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
  My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
  And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
  Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
  Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
  If I return, I quit immortal praise
  For years on years, and long-extended days.
  Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
  And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
  To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
  Jove's arm display'd asserts her from the skies!
  Her hearts are strengthen'd, and her glories rise.
  Go then to Greece, report our fix'd design;
  Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
  Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
  To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
  One stratagem has fail'd, and others will:
  Ye find, Achilles is unconquer'd still.
  Go then--digest my message as ye may--
  But here this night let reverend Phoenix stay:
  His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand
  A peaceful death in Pthia's friendly land.
  But whether he remain or sail with me,
  His age be sacred, and his will be free."

                      [Illustration: GREEK GALLEY.]

                              GREEK GALLEY.


  The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around
  In silence wrapt, in consternation drown'd,
  Attend the stern reply. Then Phoenix rose;
  (Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)
  And while the fate of suffering Greece he mourn'd,
  With accent weak these tender words return'd.

                       [Illustration: PROSERPINE.]

                               PROSERPINE.


  "Divine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,
  And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
  If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind,
  How shall thy friend, thy Phoenix, stay behind?
  The royal Peleus, when from Pthia's coast
  He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
  Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill'd,
  And new to perils of the direful field:
  He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
  To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
  Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
  No time shall part us, and no fate divide,
  Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore
  The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore,
  When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames
  (Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames),
  My father faithless to my mother's arms,
  Old as he was, adored a stranger's charms.
  I tried what youth could do (at her desire)
  To win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
  My sire with curses loads my hated head,
  And cries, 'Ye furies! barren be his bed.'
  Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,
  And ruthless Proserpine, confirm'd his vow.
  Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
  Gods! what a crime my impious heart design'd!
  I thought (but some kind god that thought suppress'd)
  To plunge the poniard in my father's breast;
  Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
  With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
  On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
  They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
  Strong guards they placed, and watch'd nine nights entire;
  The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
  The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
  And, favour'd by the night, o'erleap'd the wall,
  My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
  In Phthia's court at last my labours end.
  Your sire received me, as his son caress'd,
  With gifts enrich'd, and with possessions bless'd.
  The strong Dolopians thenceforth own'd my reign,
  And all the coast that runs along the main.
  By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
  And early wisdom to thy soul convey'd:
  Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
  A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
  Thy infant breast a like affection show'd;
  Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load)
  Or at my knee, by Phoenix wouldst thou stand;
  No food was grateful but from Phoenix' hand.(211)
  I pass my watchings o'er thy helpless years,
  The tender labours, the compliant cares,
  The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree,
  And Phoenix felt a father's joys in thee:
  Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
  And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
  Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign'd;
  A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:
  The gods (the only great, and only wise)
  Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;
  Offending man their high compassion wins,
  And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
  Prayers are Jove's daughters, of celestial race,
  Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face;
  With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,
  Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
  Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
  Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o'er mankind,
  While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
  Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove,
  For him they mediate to the throne above
  When man rejects the humble suit they make,
  The sire revenges for the daughters' sake;
  From Jove commission'd, fierce injustice then
  Descends to punish unrelenting men.
  O let not headlong passion bear the sway
  These reconciling goddesses obey
  Due honours to the seed of Jove belong,
  Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
  Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring,
  Were rage still harbour'd in the haughty king;
  Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage
  Thy friend to plead against so just a rage.
  But since what honour asks the general sends,
  And sends by those whom most thy heart commends;
  The best and noblest of the Grecian train;
  Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
  Let me (my son) an ancient fact unfold,
  A great example drawn from times of old;
  Hear what our fathers were, and what their praise,
  Who conquer'd their revenge in former days.

  "Where Calydon on rocky mountains stands(212)
  Once fought the Ctolian and Curetian bands;
  To guard it those; to conquer, these advance;
  And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance.
  The silver Cynthia bade contention rise,
  In vengeance of neglected sacrifice;
  On OEneus fields she sent a monstrous boar,
  That levell'd harvests, and whole forests tore:
  This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain)
  Great Meleager stretch'd along the plain,
  Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose,
  The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.
  Strong as they were, the bold Curetes fail'd,
  While Meleager's thundering arm prevail'd:
  Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast
  (For rage invades the wisest and the best).

  "Cursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields,
  And in his wife's embrace forgets the fields.
  (She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,
  And matchless Idas, more than man in war:
  The god of day adored the mother's charms;
  Against the god the father bent his arms:
  The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim,
  From Cleopatra changed their daughter's name,
  And call'd Alcyone; a name to show
  The father's grief, the mourning mother's woe.)
  To her the chief retired from stern debate,
  But found no peace from fierce Althaea's hate:
  Althaea's hate the unhappy warrior drew,
  Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew;
  She beat the ground, and call'd the powers beneath
  On her own son to wreak her brother's death;
  Hell heard her curses from the realms profound,
  And the red fiends that walk the nightly round.
  In vain Ctolia her deliverer waits,
  War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
  She sent ambassadors, a chosen band,
  Priests of the gods, and elders of the land;
  Besought the chief to save the sinking state:
  Their prayers were urgent, and their proffers great:
  (Full fifty acres of the richest ground,
  Half pasture green, and half with vineyards crown'd:)
  His suppliant father, aged OEneus, came;
  His sisters follow'd; even the vengeful dame,
  Althaea, sues; his friends before him fall:
  He stands relentless, and rejects them all.
  Meanwhile the victor's shouts ascend the skies;
  The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise;
  At length his wife (a form divine) appears,
  With piercing cries, and supplicating tears;
  She paints the horrors of a conquer'd town,
  The heroes slain, the palaces o'erthrown,
  The matrons ravish'd, the whole race enslaved:
  The warrior heard, he vanquish'd, and he saved.
  The Ctolians, long disdain'd, now took their turn,
  And left the chief their broken faith to mourn.
  Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious ire,
  Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire;
  Accept the presents; draw thy conquering sword;
  And be amongst our guardian gods adored."

  Thus he: the stern Achilles thus replied:
  "My second father, and my reverend guide:
  Thy friend, believe me, no such gifts demands,
  And asks no honours from a mortal's hands;
  Jove honours me, and favours my designs;
  His pleasure guides me, and his will confines;
  And here I stay (if such his high behest)
  While life's warm spirit beats within my breast.
  Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart:
  No more molest me on Atrides' part:
  Is it for him these tears are taught to flow,
  For him these sorrows? for my mortal foe?
  A generous friendship no cold medium knows,
  Burns with one love, with one resentment glows;
  One should our interests and our passions be;
  My friend must hate the man that injures me.
  Do this, my Phoenix, 'tis a generous part;
  And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.
  Let these return: our voyage, or our stay,
  Rest undetermined till the dawning day."

  He ceased; then order'd for the sage's bed
  A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
  With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke,
  And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:

  "Hence let us go--why waste we time in vain?
  See what effect our low submissions gain!
  Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
  The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
  Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
  Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
  Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
  On just atonement, we remit the deed;
  A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
  The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
  The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
  And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.(213)
  The gods that unrelenting breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
  One woman-slave was ravish'd from thy arms:
  Lo, seven are offer'd, and of equal charms.
  Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
  Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
  And know the men of all the Grecian host,
  Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most."

  "O soul of battles, and thy people's guide!
  (To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
  Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant's name
  My rage rekindles, and my soul's on flame:
  'Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the vilest slave!
  Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
  The glorious combat is no more my care;
  Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
  The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
  Not till the flames, by Hector's fury thrown,
  Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
  Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
  There cease his battle, and there feel our hand."

  This said, each prince a double goblet crown'd,
  And cast a large libation on the ground;
  Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,
  The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
  Meantime Achilles' slaves prepared a bed,
  With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:
  There, till the sacred morn restored the day,
  In slumber sweet the reverend Phoenix lay.
  But in his inner tent, an ampler space,
  Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace
  Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race.
  Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared,
  Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared;
  Achilles to his friend consign'd her charms
  When Scyros fell before his conquering arms.

  And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had sent,
  Pass'd through the hosts, and reach'd the royal tent.
  Then rising all, with goblets in their hands,
  The peers and leaders of the Achaian bands
  Hail'd their return: Atrides first begun:

  "Say what success? divine Laertes' son!
  Achilles' high resolves declare to all:
  "Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?"

  "Great king of nations! (Ithacus replied)
  Fix'd is his wrath, unconquer'd is his pride;
  He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns,
  And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns.
  To save our army, and our fleets to free,
  Is not his care; but left to Greece and thee.
  Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky,
  Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly;
  Us too he bids our oars and sails employ,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy;
  For Jove o'ershades her with his arm divine,
  Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.
  Such was his word: what further he declared,
  These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.
  But Phoenix in his tent the chief retains,
  Safe to transport him to his native plains
  When morning dawns; if other he decree,
  His age is sacred, and his choice is free."

  Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host,
  With sorrow seized, in consternation lost,
  Attend the stern reply. Tydides broke
  The general silence, and undaunted spoke.
  "Why should we gifts to proud Achilles send,
  Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend?
  His country's woes he glories to deride,
  And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
  Be the fierce impulse of his rage obey'd,
  Our battles let him or desert or aid;
  Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit:
  That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:
  What for ourselves we can, is always ours;
  This night, let due repast refresh our powers;
  (For strength consists in spirits and in blood,
  And those are owed to generous wine and food;)
  But when the rosy messenger of day
  Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray,
  Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine
  In flaming arms, a long-extended line:
  In the dread front let great Atrides stand,
  The first in danger, as in high command."

  Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,
  Then each to Heaven the due libations pays;
  Till sleep, descending o'er the tents, bestows
  The grateful blessings of desired repose."(214)

                        [Illustration: ACHILLES.]

                                ACHILLES.





BOOK X.


ARGUMENT.

THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.

Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, and
Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call a
council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemies' camp, to
learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed undertakes this
hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for his companion. In
their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had sent on a like design
to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are informed of the situation
of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and particularly of Rhesus, and the
Thracians who were lately arrived. They pass on with success; kill Rhesus,
with several of his officers, and seize the famous horses of that prince,
with which they return in triumph to the camp.

The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps.

  All night the chiefs before their vessels lay,
  And lost in sleep the labours of the day:
  All but the king: with various thoughts oppress'd,(215)
  His country's cares lay rolling in his breast.
  As when by lightnings Jove's ethereal power
  Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower,
  Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore,
  Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar;
  By fits one flash succeeds as one expires,
  And heaven flames thick with momentary fires:
  So bursting frequent from Atrides' breast,
  Sighs following sighs his inward fears confess'd.
  Now o'er the fields, dejected, he surveys
  From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze;
  Hears in the passing wind their music blow,
  And marks distinct the voices of the foe.
  Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast,
  Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
  He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove,
  And sues to him that ever lives above:
  Inly he groans; while glory and despair
  Divide his heart, and wage a double war.

  A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves;
  To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves,
  With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate
  What yet remains to save the afflicted state.
  He rose, and first he cast his mantle round,
  Next on his feet the shining sandals bound;
  A lion's yellow spoils his back conceal'd;
  His warlike hand a pointed javelin held.
  Meanwhile his brother, press'd with equal woes,
  Alike denied the gifts of soft repose,
  Laments for Greece, that in his cause before
  So much had suffer'd and must suffer more.
  A leopard's spotted hide his shoulders spread:
  A brazen helmet glitter'd on his head:
  Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went
  To wake Atrides in the royal tent.
  Already waked, Atrides he descried,
  His armour buckling at his vessel's side.
  Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:
  "Why puts my brother his bright armour on?
  Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours,
  To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers?
  But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
  Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask;
  Guideless, alone, through night's dark shade to go,
  And midst a hostile camp explore the foe."

  To whom the king: "In such distress we stand,
  No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;
  Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
  But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
  For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies,
  And bows his head to Hector's sacrifice.
  What eye has witness'd, or what ear believed,
  In one great day, by one great arm achieved,
  Such wondrous deeds as Hector's hand has done,
  And we beheld, the last revolving sun
  What honours the beloved of Jove adorn!
  Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;
  Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
  And curse the battle where their fathers fell.

  "Now speed thy hasty course along the fleet,
  There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete;
  Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;
  To keep the guards on duty be his care,
  (For Nestor's influence best that quarter guides,
  Whose son with Merion, o'er the watch presides.")
  To whom the Spartan: "These thy orders borne,
  Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?"
  "There shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,)
  Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,
  The paths so many, and the camp so wide.
  Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise,
  Urge by their fathers' fame their future praise.
  Forget we now our state and lofty birth;
  Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.
  To labour is the lot of man below;
  And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe."

  This said, each parted to his several cares:
  The king to Nestor's sable ship repairs;
  The sage protector of the Greeks he found
  Stretch'd in his bed with all his arms around
  The various-colour'd scarf, the shield he rears,
  The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
  The dreadful weapons of the warrior's rage,
  That, old in arms, disdain'd the peace of age.
  Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,
  The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said:

  "What art thou, speak, that on designs unknown,
  While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;
  Seek'st thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
  Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell."

  "O son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoin'd,)
  Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
  Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
  The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,
  Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,
  And woes, that only with his life shall end!
  Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
  And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
  No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,
  Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
  With fears distracted, with no fix'd design;
  And all my people's miseries are mine.
  If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
  (Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)
  Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend;
  Now let us jointly to the trench descend,
  At every gate the fainting guard excite,
  Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;
  Else may the sudden foe our works invade,
  So near, and favour'd by the gloomy shade."

  To him thus Nestor: "Trust the powers above,
  Nor think proud Hector's hopes confirm'd by Jove:
  How ill agree the views of vain mankind,
  And the wise counsels of the eternal mind!
  Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain
  That great Achilles rise and rage again,
  What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
  Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys;
  The care is next our other chiefs to raise:
  Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need;
  Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed.
  Some other be despatch'd of nimbler feet,
  To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,
  Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.(216)
  To rouse the Spartan I myself decree;
  Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee,
  Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no share
  With his great brother in his martial care:
  Him it behoved to every chief to sue,
  Preventing every part perform'd by you;
  For strong necessity our toils demands,
  Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands."

  To whom the king: "With reverence we allow
  Thy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now:
  My generous brother is of gentle kind,
  He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind;
  Through too much deference to our sovereign sway,
  Content to follow when we lead the way:
  But now, our ills industrious to prevent,
  Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my tent.
  The chiefs you named, already at his call,
  Prepare to meet us near the navy-wall;
  Assembling there, between the trench and gates,
  Near the night-guards, our chosen council waits."

  "Then none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand,
  For great examples justify command."
  With that, the venerable warrior rose;
  The shining greaves his manly legs enclose;
  His purple mantle golden buckles join'd,
  Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined.
  Then rushing from his tent, he snatch'd in haste
  His steely lance, that lighten'd as he pass'd.
  The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd,
  Stopp'd at Ulysses' tent, and call'd aloud.
  Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent,
  Awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent.
  "What new distress, what sudden cause of fright,
  Thus leads you wandering in the silent night?"
  "O prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied)
  Wise as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried:
  Whatever means of safety can be sought,
  Whatever counsels can inspire our thought,
  Whatever methods, or to fly or fight;
  All, all depend on this important night!"
  He heard, return'd, and took his painted shield;
  Then join'd the chiefs, and follow'd through the field.
  Without his tent, bold Diomed they found,
  All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round:
  Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,
  His head reclining on his bossy shield.
  A wood of spears stood by, that, fix'd upright,
  Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
  A bull's black hide composed the hero's bed;
  A splendid carpet roll'd beneath his head.
  Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes
  The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:

  "Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
  Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
  But sleep'st thou now, when from yon hill the foe
  Hangs o'er the fleet, and shades our walls below?"

  At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;
  The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said:
  "Wondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,
  Though years and honours bid thee seek repose,
  Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;
  Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake."
  "My friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;
  These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;
  Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire
  To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:
  But now the last despair surrounds our host;
  No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;
  Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife,
  Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:
  Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage,
  Employ thy youth as I employ my age;
  Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest;
  He serves me most, who serves his country best."

  This said, the hero o'er his shoulders flung
  A lion's spoils, that to his ankles hung;
  Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.
  Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
  The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.

  And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;
  A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared:
  The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,
  And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
  So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,
  With toil protected from the prowling train;
  When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold,
  Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold:
  Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear;
  Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear
  Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around,
  Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
  Thus watch'd the Grecians, cautious of surprise,
  Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes:
  Each step of passing feet increased the affright;
  And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
  Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey'd,
  And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
  "'Tis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ;
  Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.
  Watch thus, and Greece shall live." The hero said;
  Then o'er the trench the following chieftains led.
  His son, and godlike Merion, march'd behind
  (For these the princes to their council join'd).
  The trenches pass'd, the assembled kings around
  In silent state the consistory crown'd.
  A place there was, yet undefiled with gore,
  The spot where Hector stopp'd his rage before;
  When night descending, from his vengeful hand
  Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band:
  (The plain beside with mangled corps was spread,
  And all his progress mark'd by heaps of dead:)
  There sat the mournful kings: when Neleus' son,
  The council opening, in these words begun:

  "Is there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,
  His life to hazard, and his country save?
  Lives there a man, who singly dares to go
  To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
  Or favour'd by the night approach so near,
  Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
  If to besiege our navies they prepare,
  Or Troy once more must be the seat of war?
  This could he learn, and to our peers recite,
  And pass unharm'd the dangers of the night;
  What fame were his through all succeeding days,
  While Phoebus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
  What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
  What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
  A sable ewe each leader should provide,
  With each a sable lambkin by her side;
  At every rite his share should be increased,
  And his the foremost honours of the feast."

  Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,
  Tydides spoke--"The man you seek is here.
  Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way,
  Some god within commands, and I obey.
  But let some other chosen warrior join,
  To raise my hopes, and second my design.
  By mutual confidence and mutual aid,
  Great deeds are done, and great discoveries made;
  The wise new prudence from the wise acquire,
  And one brave hero fans another's fire."

  Contending leaders at the word arose;
  Each generous breast with emulation glows;
  So brave a task each Ajax strove to share,
  Bold Merion strove, and Nestor's valiant heir;
  The Spartan wish'd the second place to gain,
  And great Ulysses wish'd, nor wish'd in vain.
  Then thus the king of men the contest ends:
  "Thou first of warriors, and thou best of friends,
  Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join
  In this great enterprise, is only thine.
  Just be thy choice, without affection made;
  To birth, or office, no respect be paid;
  Let worth determine here." The monarch spake,
  And inly trembled for his brother's sake.

  "Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin'd)
  My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
  How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
  To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
  A chief, whose safety is Minerva's care;
  So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war:
  Bless'd in his conduct, I no aid require;
  Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire."

  "It fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame,
  (Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:
  Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe,
  Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
  But let us haste--Night rolls the hours away,
  The reddening orient shows the coming day,
  The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,
  And of night's empire but a third remains."

  Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  In arms terrific their huge limbs they dress'd.
  A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,
  And ample buckler, to Tydides gave:
  Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,
  Short of its crest, and with no plume o'erspread:
  (Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:)
  No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
  Next him Ulysses took a shining sword,
  A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:
  A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound,
  (Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown'd;
  Soft wool within; without, in order spread,(217)
  A boar's white teeth grinn'd horrid o'er his head.
  This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus' son,
  Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,
  And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize
  Molus received, the pledge of social ties;
  The helmet next by Merion was possess'd,
  And now Ulysses' thoughtful temples press'd.
  Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,
  And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
  Just then, in sign she favour'd their intent,
  A long-wing'd heron great Minerva sent:
  This, though surrounding shades obscured their view.
  By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
  As from the right she soar'd, Ulysses pray'd,
  Hail'd the glad omen, and address'd the maid:

  "O daughter of that god whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield!
  O thou! for ever present in my way,
  Who all my motions, all my toils survey!
  Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade,
  Safe by thy succour to our ships convey'd,
  And let some deed this signal night adorn,
  To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn."

  Then godlike Diomed preferr'd his prayer:
  "Daughter of Jove, unconquer'd Pallas! hear.
  Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won,
  As thou defend'st the sire, defend the son.
  When on Csopus' banks the banded powers
  Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers,
  Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show,
  He went a legate, but return'd a foe:
  Then help'd by thee, and cover'd by thy shield,
  He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
  So now be present, O celestial maid!
  So still continue to the race thine aid!
  A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke,
  Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
  With ample forehead, and with spreading horns,
  Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns."
  The heroes pray'd, and Pallas from the skies
  Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
  Now, like two lions panting for the prey,
  With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way,
  Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain,
  Through dust, through blood, o'er arms, and hills of slain.

  Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy,
  On high designs the wakeful hours employ;
  The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed;
  Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed:

  "What glorious man, for high attempts prepared,
  Dares greatly venture for a rich reward?
  Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make,
  What watch they keep, and what resolves they take?
  If now subdued they meditate their flight,
  And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night?
  His be the chariot that shall please him most,
  Of all the plunder of the vanquish'd host;
  His the fair steeds that all the rest excel,
  And his the glory to have served so well."

  A youth there was among the tribes of Troy,
  Dolon his name, Eumedes' only boy,
  (Five girls beside the reverend herald told.)
  Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold;
  Not bless'd by nature with the charms of face,
  But swift of foot, and matchless in the race.
  "Hector! (he said) my courage bids me meet
  This high achievement, and explore the fleet:
  But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
  And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
  The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
  That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
  Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
  Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
  Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
  And all their counsels, all their aims betray."

  The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
  Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
  "Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
  Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
  By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
  And him alone the immortal steeds adorn."

  Thus Hector swore: the gods were call'd in vain,
  But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
  Across his back the bended bow he flung,
  A wolf's grey hide around his shoulders hung,
  A ferret's downy fur his helmet lined,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
  Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
  And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
  Scarce had he pass'd the steeds and Trojan throng,
  (Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
  When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
  Ulysses mark'd, and thus to Diomed;

  "O friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
  Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
  Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
  Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
  Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
  Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
  But if too swift of foot he flies before,
  Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
  Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
  And intercept his hoped return to Troy."

  With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd their head,
  (As Dolon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
  Along the path the spy unwary flew;
  Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
  So distant they, and such the space between,
  As when two teams of mules divide the green,
  (To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)
  When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
  Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they pass'd;
  Hector (he thought) had sent, and check'd his haste,
  Till scarce at distance of a javelin's throw,
  No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.
  As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind;
  Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind;
  Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,
  And from the herd still turn the flying prey:
  So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew;
  So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
  Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls,
  And mingles with the guards that watch the walls;
  When brave Tydides stopp'd; a gen'rous thought
  (Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought,
  Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance,
  And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.
  Then thus aloud: "Whoe'er thou art, remain;
  This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain."
  He said, and high in air the weapon cast,
  Which wilful err'd, and o'er his shoulder pass'd;
  Then fix'd in earth. Against the trembling wood
  The wretch stood propp'd, and quiver'd as he stood;
  A sudden palsy seized his turning head;
  His loose teeth chatter'd, and his colour fled;
  The panting warriors seize him as he stands,
  And with unmanly tears his life demands.

  "O spare my youth, and for the breath I owe,
  Large gifts of price my father shall bestow:
  Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told,
  And steel well-temper'd and refulgent gold."

  To whom Ulysses made this wise reply:
  "Whoe'er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
  What moves thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight,
  To roam the silent fields in dead of night?
  Cam'st thou the secrets of our camp to find,
  By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind?
  Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led,
  Through heaps of carnage, to despoil the dead?"

  Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look:
  (Still, as he spoke, his limbs with horror shook:)
  "Hither I came, by Hector's words deceived;
  Much did he promise, rashly I believed:
  No less a bribe than great Achilles' car,
  And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war,
  Urged me, unwilling, this attempt to make;
  To learn what counsels, what resolves you take:
  If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight,
  And, tired with toils, neglect the watch of night."

  "Bold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize,
  (Ulysses, with a scornful smile, replies,)
  Far other rulers those proud steeds demand,
  And scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand;
  Even great Achilles scarce their rage can tame,
  Achilles sprung from an immortal dame.
  But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
  Where lies encamp'd the Trojan chief to-night?
  Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep
  Their other princes? tell what watch they keep:
  Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are;
  Or here to combat, from their city far,
  Or back to Ilion's walls transfer the war?"

  Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes' son:
  "What Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
  Hector, the peers assembling in his tent,
  A council holds at Ilus' monument.
  No certain guards the nightly watch partake;
  Where'er yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake:
  Anxious for Troy, the guard the natives keep;
  Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces sleep,
  Whose wives and infants, from the danger far,
  Discharge their souls of half the fears of war."

  "Then sleep those aids among the Trojan train,
  (Inquired the chief,) or scattered o'er the plain?"
  To whom the spy: "Their powers they thus dispose
  The Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows,
  The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian host,
  And Leleges, encamp along the coast.
  Not distant far, lie higher on the land
  The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian band,
  And Phrygia's horse, by Thymbras' ancient wall;
  The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
  These Troy but lately to her succour won,
  Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus' son:
  I saw his coursers in proud triumph go,
  Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow;
  Rich silver plates his shining car infold;
  His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold;
  No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load,
  Celestial panoply, to grace a god!
  Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne,
  Or leave me here, a captive's fate to mourn,
  In cruel chains, till your return reveal
  The truth or falsehood of the news I tell."

  To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:
  "Think not to live, though all the truth be shown:
  Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife
  To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
  Or that again our camps thou may'st explore?
  No--once a traitor, thou betray'st no more."

  Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared
  With humble blandishment to stroke his beard,
  Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew,
  Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;
  One instant snatch'd his trembling soul to hell,
  The head, yet speaking, mutter'd as it fell.
  The furry helmet from his brow they tear,
  The wolf's grey hide, the unbended bow and spear;
  These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,
  To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize:

  "Great queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,
  And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil;
  Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise;
  O speed our labours, and direct our ways!"
  This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced,
  High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;
  Then heap'd with reeds and gathered boughs the plain,
  To guide their footsteps to the place again.

  Through the still night they cross the devious fields,
  Slippery with blood, o'er arms and heaps of shields,
  Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,
  And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
  Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band:
  The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
  Their arms in order on the ground reclined,
  Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:
  Amidst lay Rhesus, stretch'd in sleep profound,
  And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
  The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,
  And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
  "The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
  Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
  Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,
  Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie;
  Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,
  Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds."

  Pallas (this said) her hero's bosom warms,
  Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms;
  Where'er he pass'd, a purple stream pursued
  His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,
  Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore,
  And a low groan remurmur'd through the shore.
  So the grim lion, from his nightly den,
  O'erleaps the fences, and invades the pen,
  On sheep or goats, resistless in his way,
  He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey;
  Nor stopp'd the fury of his vengeful hand,
  Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
  Ulysses following, as his partner slew,
  Back by the foot each slaughter'd warrior drew;
  The milk-white coursers studious to convey
  Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way:
  Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred,
  Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
  Now twelve despatch'd, the monarch last they found;
  Tydides' falchion fix'd him to the ground.
  Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent,
  A warlike form appear'd before his tent,
  Whose visionary steel his bosom tore:
  So dream'd the monarch, and awaked no more.(218)

  Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,
  And leads them, fasten'd by the silver reins;
  These, with his bow unbent, he lash'd along;
  (The scourge forgot, on Rhesus' chariot hung;)
  Then gave his friend the signal to retire;
  But him, new dangers, new achievements fire;
  Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade
  To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
  Drag off the car where Rhesus' armour lay,
  Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
  While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands,
  Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:

  "Enough, my son; from further slaughter cease,
  Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;
  Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy,
  Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy."

  The voice divine confess'd the martial maid;
  In haste he mounted, and her word obey'd;
  The coursers fly before Ulysses' bow,
  Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.

  Not unobserved they pass'd: the god of light
  Had watch'd his Troy, and mark'd Minerva's flight,
  Saw Tydeus' son with heavenly succour bless'd,
  And vengeful anger fill'd his sacred breast.
  Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,
  And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;
  (On Rhesus' side accustom'd to attend,
  A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)
  He rose, and saw the field deform'd with blood,
  An empty space where late the coursers stood,
  The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast;
  For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
  Now while on Rhesus' name he calls in vain,
  The gathering tumult spreads o'er all the plain;
  On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
  And wondering view the slaughters of the night.

  Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade
  Where late the spoils of Hector's spy were laid,
  Ulysses stopp'd; to him Tydides bore
  The trophy, dropping yet with Dolon's gore:
  Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet
  The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet.

 [Illustration: DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.]

         DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.


  Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound,
  Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:
  "Methinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear,
  Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear;
  Perhaps some horses of the Trojan breed
  (So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed)
  The great Tydides and Ulysses bear,
  Return'd triumphant with this prize of war.
  Yet much I fear (ah, may that fear be vain!)
  The chiefs outnumber'd by the Trojan train;
  Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the shore;
  Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no more."

  Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear,
  And spring to earth; the Greeks dismiss their fear:
  With words of friendship and extended hands
  They greet the kings; and Nestor first demands:

  "Say thou, whose praises all our host proclaim,
  Thou living glory of the Grecian name!
  Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestow'd,
  The spoil of foes, or present of a god?
  Not those fair steeds, so radiant and so gay,
  That draw the burning chariot of the day.
  Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield,
  And daily mingle in the martial field;
  But sure till now no coursers struck my sight
  Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight.
  Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize,
  Bless'd as ye are, and favourites of the skies;
  The care of him who bids the thunder roar,
  And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore."

  "Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoin'd,)
  The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
  Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view,
  Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew;
  Sleeping he died, with all his guards around,
  And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.
  These other spoils from conquer'd Dolon came,
  A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame;
  By Hector sent our forces to explore,
  He now lies headless on the sandy shore."

  Then o'er the trench the bounding coursers flew;
  The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
  Straight to Tydides' high pavilion borne,
  The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn:
  The neighing coursers their new fellows greet,
  And the full racks are heap'd with generous wheat.
  But Dolon's armour, to his ships convey'd,
  High on the painted stern Ulysses laid,
  A trophy destin'd to the blue-eyed maid.

  Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain
  They cleanse their bodies in the neighb'ring main:
  Then in the polished bath, refresh'd from toil,
  Their joints they supple with dissolving oil,
  In due repast indulge the genial hour,
  And first to Pallas the libations pour:
  They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine,
  And the crown'd goblet foams with floods of wine.





BOOK XI.


ARGUMENT

THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON.

Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector
prepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva
give the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector is
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the
engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field. He
then makes a great slaughter of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put a stop
to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is obliged to
desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans, wounded, and in
the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him. Hector comes against
Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and rallies the Greeks. In
the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the army, is pierced with an
arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in Nestor's chariot. Achilles
(who overlooked the action from his ship) sent Patroclus to inquire which
of the Greeks was wounded in that manner; Nestor entertains him in his
tent with an account of the accidents of the day, and a long recital of
some former wars which he remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon
persuading Achilles to fight for his countrymen, or at least to permit him
to do it, clad in Achilles' armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets
Eurypylus also wounded, and assists him in that distress.

This book opens with the eight and-twentieth day of the poem, and the same
day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through the
twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and
part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the
monument of Ilus.

  The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,(219)
  Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' bed;
  With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
  When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's command,
  The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
  Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
  And, wrapt in tempests, o'er the fleet descends.
  High on Ulysses' bark her horrid stand
  She took, and thunder'd through the seas and land.

  Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
  Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound,
  Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng
  With horror sounds the loud Orthian song:
  The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms
  Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.
  No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
  But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

                 [Illustration: THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.]

                         THE DESCENT OF DISCORD.


  The king of men his hardy host inspires
  With loud command, with great example fires!
  Himself first rose, himself before the rest
  His mighty limbs in radiant armour dress'd,
  And first he cased his manly legs around
  In shining greaves with silver buckles bound;
  The beaming cuirass next adorn'd his breast,
  The same which once king Cinyras possess'd:
  (The fame of Greece and her assembled host
  Had reach'd that monarch on the Cyprian coast;
  'Twas then, the friendship of the chief to gain,
  This glorious gift he sent, nor sent in vain:)
  Ten rows of azure steel the work infold,
  Twice ten of tin, and twelve of ductile gold;
  Three glittering dragons to the gorget rise,
  Whose imitated scales against the skies
  Reflected various light, and arching bow'd,
  Like colour'd rainbows o'er a showery cloud
  (Jove's wondrous bow, of three celestial dies,
  Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies).
  A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
  Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
  Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased
  The shining blade, and golden hangers graced.
  His buckler's mighty orb was next display'd,
  That round the warrior cast a dreadful shade;
  Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround,
  And twice ten bosses the bright convex crown'd:
  Tremendous Gorgon frown'd upon its field,
  And circling terrors fill'd the expressive shield:
  Within its concave hung a silver thong,
  On which a mimic serpent creeps along,
  His azure length in easy waves extends,
  Till in three heads the embroider'd monster ends.
  Last o'er his brows his fourfold helm he placed,
  With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
  And in his hands two steely javelins wields,
  That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.

  That instant Juno, and the martial maid,
  In happy thunders promised Greece their aid;
  High o'er the chief they clash'd their arms in air,
  And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war.

  Close to the limits of the trench and mound,
  The fiery coursers to their chariots bound
  The squires restrain'd: the foot, with those who wield
  The lighter arms, rush forward to the field.
  To second these, in close array combined,
  The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
  Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun,
  As with the light the warriors' toils begun.
  Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distill'd
  Red drops of blood o'er all the fatal field;(220)
  The woes of men unwilling to survey,
  And all the slaughters that must stain the day.

  Near Ilus' tomb, in order ranged around,
  The Trojan lines possess'd the rising ground:
  There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
  Cneas, honour'd as a guardian god;
  Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
  The brother-warriors of Antenor's line:
  With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face
  And fair proportion match'd the ethereal race.
  Great Hector, cover'd with his spacious shield,
  Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
  As the red star now shows his sanguine fires
  Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires,
  Thus through the ranks appear'd the godlike man,
  Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;
  While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies,
  Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
  As sweating reapers in some wealthy field,
  Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield,
  Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;
  Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet:
  So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,
  And falling ranks are strow'd on every side.
  None stoop'd a thought to base inglorious flight;(221)
  But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,
  Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey;
  Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
  Discord with joy the scene of death descries,
  And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes:
  Discord alone, of all the immortal train,
  Swells the red horrors of this direful plain:
  The gods in peace their golden mansions fill,
  Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:
  But general murmurs told their griefs above,
  And each accused the partial will of Jove.
  Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone,
  The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne,
  Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate;
  And fix'd, fulfill'd the just decrees of fate.
  On earth he turn'd his all-considering eyes,
  And mark'd the spot where Ilion's towers arise;
  The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread,
  The victor's rage, the dying, and the dead.

  Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's pure azure spread the glowing light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But now (what time in some sequester'd vale
  The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,
  When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear,
  And claim a respite from the sylvan war;
  But not till half the prostrate forests lay
  Stretch'd in long ruin, and exposed to day)
  Then, nor till then, the Greeks' impulsive might
  Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light.
  Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led,
  And slew Bienor at his people's head:
  Whose squire Oileus, with a sudden spring,
  Leap'd from the chariot to revenge his king;
  But in his front he felt the fatal wound,
  Which pierced his brain, and stretch'd him on the ground.
  Atrides spoil'd, and left them on the plain:
  Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain:
  Now soil'd with dust, and naked to the sky,
  Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.

  Two sons of Priam next to battle move,
  The product, one of marriage, one of love:(222)
  In the same car the brother-warriors ride;
  This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
  Far other task, than when they wont to keep,
  On Ida's tops, their father's fleecy sheep.
  These on the mountains once Achilles found,
  And captive led, with pliant osiers bound;
  Then to their sire for ample sums restored;
  But now to perish by Atrides' sword:
  Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:
  Cleft through the head his brother's fate succeeds,
  Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls,
  And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
  The Trojans see the youths untimely die,
  But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
  So when a lion ranging o'er the lawns.
  Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,
  Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws,
  And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws;
  The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,
  But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way;
  All drown'd in sweat, the panting mother flies,
  And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.

  Amidst the tumult of the routed train,
  The sons of false Antimachus were slain;
  He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold,
  And voted Helen's stay for Paris' gold.
  Atrides mark'd, as these their safety sought,
  And slew the children for the father's fault;
  Their headstrong horse unable to restrain,
  They shook with fear, and dropp'd the silken rein;
  Then in the chariot on their knees they fall,
  And thus with lifted hands for mercy call:

  "O spare our youth, and for the life we owe,
  Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow:
  Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,
  The Grecian ships his captive sons detain,
  Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,
  And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold."

  These words, attended with the flood of tears,
  The youths address'd to unrelenting ears:
  The vengeful monarch gave this stern reply:
  "If from Antimachus ye spring, ye die;
  The daring wretch who once in council stood
  To shed Ulysses' and my brother's blood,
  For proffer'd peace! and sues his seed for grace?
  No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race."

  This said, Pisander from the car he cast,
  And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last.
  His brother leap'd to earth; but, as he lay,
  The trenchant falchion lopp'd his hands away;
  His sever'd head was toss'd among the throng,
  And, rolling, drew a bloody train along.
  Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew;
  The king's example all his Greeks pursue.
  Now by the foot the flying foot were slain,
  Horse trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain.
  From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise,
  Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.
  The brass-hoof'd steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
  And the thick thunder beats the labouring ground,
  Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds;
  The distanced army wonders at his deeds,
  As when the winds with raging flames conspire,
  And o'er the forests roll the flood of fire,
  In blazing heaps the grove's old honours fall,
  And one refulgent ruin levels all:
  Before Atrides' rage so sinks the foe,
  Whole squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low.
  The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword,
  And many a car, now lighted of its lord,
  Wide o'er the field with guideless fury rolls,
  Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;
  While his keen falchion drinks the warriors' lives;
  More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!

  Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,
  But Jove and destiny prolong'd his date.
  Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood,
  Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.

  Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
  Through the mid field the routed urge their way:
  Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown,
  The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
  As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
  Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
  Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
  The hero halts, and his associates waits.
  Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
  Dispersed, disorder'd, fly the Trojan train.
  So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay'd
  The lion's roaring through the midnight shade;
  On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
  The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
  Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
  Still press'd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
  Hurl'd from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill'd,
  And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

  Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
  Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
  But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
  And down their summits pour'd a hundred rills:
  The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
  And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:

  "Iris, with haste thy golden wings display,
  To godlike Hector this our word convey--
  While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
  Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
  Bid him give way; but issue forth commands,
  And trust the war to less important hands:
  But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
  That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
  Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,
  Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
  Till to the main the burning sun descend,
  And sacred night her awful shade extend."

  He spoke, and Iris at his word obey'd;
  On wings of winds descends the various maid.
  The chief she found amidst the ranks of war,
  Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car.
  The goddess then: "O son of Priam, hear!
  From Jove I come, and his high mandate bear.
  While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
  Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
  Abstain from fight; yet issue forth commands,
  And trust the war to less important hands:
  But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
  The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
  Then Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast,
  Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
  Till to the main the burning sun descend,
  And sacred night her awful shade extend."

  She said, and vanish'd. Hector, with a bound,
  Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground,
  In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand
  A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band;
  Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
  And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
  They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare,
  Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.
  New force, new spirit, to each breast returns;
  The fight renew'd with fiercer fury burns:
  The king leads on: all fix on him their eye,
  And learn from him to conquer, or to die.

  Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell,
  Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
  The great Iphidamas, the bold and young,
  From sage Antenor and Theano sprung;
  Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred,
  And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.
  Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest,
  And early honour warm his generous breast,
  When the kind sire consign'd his daughter's charms
  (Theano's sister) to his youthful arms.
  But call'd by glory to the wars of Troy,
  He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy;
  From his loved bride departs with melting eyes,
  And swift to aid his dearer country flies.
  With twelve black ships he reach'd Percope's strand,
  Thence took the long laborious march by land.
  Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs,
  Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings.
  Atrides first discharged the missive spear;
  The Trojan stoop'd, the javelin pass'd in air.
  Then near the corslet, at the monarch's heart,
  With all his strength, the youth directs his dart:
  But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound,
  The point rebated, and repell'd the wound.
  Encumber'd with the dart, Atrides stands,
  Till, grasp'd with force, he wrench'd it from his hands;
  At once his weighty sword discharged a wound
  Full on his neck, that fell'd him to the ground.
  Stretch'd in the dust the unhappy warrior lies,
  And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
  Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain!
  Thy country's friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
  No more the youth shall join his consort's side,
  At once a virgin, and at once a bride!
  No more with presents her embraces meet,
  Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet,
  On whom his passion, lavish of his store,
  Bestow'd so much, and vainly promised more!
  Unwept, uncover'd, on the plain he lay,
  While the proud victor bore his arms away.

  Coon, Antenor's eldest hope, was nigh:
  Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye,
  While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view'd,
  And the pale features now deform'd with blood.
  Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took,
  Aim'd at the king, and near his elbow strook.
  The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part,
  And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
  Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear
  On Coon rushes with his lifted spear:
  His brother's corpse the pious Trojan draws,
  And calls his country to assert his cause;
  Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,
  And o'er the body spreads his ample shield.
  Atrides, marking an unguarded part,
  Transfix'd the warrior with his brazen dart;
  Prone on his brother's bleeding breast he lay,
  The monarch's falchion lopp'd his head away:
  The social shades the same dark journey go,
  And join each other in the realms below.

  The vengeful victor rages round the fields,
  With every weapon art or fury yields:
  By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
  Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o'erthrown.
  This, while yet warm distill'd the purple flood;
  But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood,
  Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,
  Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send:
  (The powers that cause the teeming matron's throes,
  Sad mothers of unutterable woes!)
  Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,
  He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;
  Then with a voice which fury made more strong,
  And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:

  "O friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won;
  Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:
  Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay,
  And envies half the glories of the day."

  He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong;
  The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
  Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,
  And from their sides the foam descends in snow;
  Shot through the battle in a moment's space,
  The wounded monarch at his tent they place.

  No sooner Hector saw the king retired,
  But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:
  "Hear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race!
  Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:
  Now call to mind your ancient trophies won,
  Your great forefathers' virtues, and your own.
  Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers!
  Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
  Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;
  And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds."

  With words like these the fiery chief alarms
  His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
  As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear
  The brindled lion, or the tusky bear:
  With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,
  And springs the foremost with his lifted dart:
  So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare;
  Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
  On the black body of the foe he pours;
  As from the cloud's deep bosom, swell'd with showers,
  A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps,
  Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.
  Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojan's glory crown'd,
  Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
  Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
  Opites next was added to their side;
  Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,
  Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night;
  Csymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;
  The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
  As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,
  Dispels the gather'd clouds that Notus forms:
  The gust continued, violent and strong,
  Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;
  Now to the skies the foaming billows rears,
  Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:
  Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands,
  O'erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.
  Now the last ruin the whole host appals;
  Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls;
  But wise Ulysses call'd Tydides forth,
  His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.
  "And stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
  Till Hector's arm involve the ships in flame?
  Haste, let us join, and combat side by side."
  The warrior thus, and thus the friend replied:

  "No martial toil I shun, no danger fear;
  Let Hector come; I wait his fury here.
  But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train:
  And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain."

  He sigh'd; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel,
  And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell:
  Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord,
  His death ennobled by Ulysses' sword.
  There slain, they left them in eternal night,
  Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.
  So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds,
  Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.
  Stern Hector's conquests in the middle plain
  Stood check'd awhile, and Greece respired again.

  The sons of Merops shone amidst the war;
  Towering they rode in one refulgent car:
  In deep prophetic arts their father skill'd,
  Had warn'd his children from the Trojan field.
  Fate urged them on: the father warn'd in vain;
  They rush'd to fight, and perish'd on the plain;
  Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms;
  The stern Tydides strips their shining arms.
  Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,
  And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize.
  Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight,
  And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.
  By Tydeus' lance Agastrophus was slain,
  The far-famed hero of Paeonian strain;
  Wing'd with his fears, on foot he strove to fly,
  His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh:
  Through broken orders, swifter than the wind,
  He fled, but flying left his life behind.
  This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes
  Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies;
  Shouts, as he pass'd, the crystal regions rend,
  And moving armies on his march attend.
  Great Diomed himself was seized with fear,
  And thus bespoke his brother of the war:

  "Mark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!
  The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field:
  Here stand his utmost force."--The warrior said;
  Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled;
  Nor miss'd its aim, but where the plumage danced
  Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
  Safe in his helm (the gift of Phoebus' hands)
  Without a wound the Trojan hero stands;
  But yet so stunn'd, that, staggering on the plain.
  His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain;
  O'er his dim sight the misty vapours rise,
  And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes.
  Tydides followed to regain his lance;
  While Hector rose, recover'd from the trance,
  Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd:
  The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud:
  "Once more thank Phoebus for thy forfeit breath,
  Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.
  Well by Apollo are thy prayers repaid,
  And oft that partial power has lent his aid.
  Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand,
  If any god assist Tydides' hand.
  Fly then, inglorious! but thy flight, this day,
  Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,"

  Him, while he triumph'd, Paris eyed from far,
  (The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of war;)
  Around the fields his feather'd shafts he sent,
  From ancient Ilus' ruin'd monument:
  Behind the column placed, he bent his bow,
  And wing'd an arrow at the unwary foe;
  Just as he stoop'd, Agastrophus's crest
  To seize, and drew the corslet from his breast,
  The bowstring twang'd; nor flew the shaft in vain,
  But pierced his foot, and nail'd it to the plain.
  The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring.
  Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.

  "He bleeds! (he cries) some god has sped my dart!
  Would the same god had fix'd it in his heart!
  So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand,
  Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand:
  Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear,
  As scatter'd lambs the rushing lion fear."

  He dauntless thus: "Thou conqueror of the fair,
  Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair;
  Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,
  Unskill'd in arms to act a manly part!
  Thou hast but done what boys or women can;
  Such hands may wound, but not incense a man.
  Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,
  A coward's weapon never hurts the brave.
  Not so this dart, which thou may'st one day feel;
  Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:
  Where this but lights, some noble life expires;
  Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires,
  Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,
  And leaves such objects as distract the fair."
  Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,
  Before him steps, and bending draws the dart:
  Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;
  Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds.

  Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,
  The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on;
  But stands collected in himself, and whole,
  And questions thus his own unconquer'd soul:

  "What further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
  What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
  What danger, singly if I stand the ground,
  My friends all scatter'd, all the foes around?
  Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice,
  The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
  To die or conquer, proves a hero's heart;
  And, knowing this, I know a soldier's part."

  Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast,
  Near, and more near, the shady cohorts press'd;
  These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;
  And round him deep the steely circle grows.
  So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds
  Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;
  He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire;
  His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;
  By these, by those, on every part is plied;
  And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
  Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
  Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;
  Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust,
  Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
  Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near;
  Ulysses reach'd him with the fatal spear;
  But to his aid his brother Socus flies,
  Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise.
  Near as he drew, the warrior thus began:

  "O great Ulysses! much-enduring man!
  Not deeper skill'd in every martial sleight,
  Than worn to toils, and active in the fight!
  This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace,
  And end at once the great Hippasian race,
  Or thou beneath this lance must press the field."
  He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield:
  Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown,
  Plough'd half his side, and bared it to the bone.
  By Pallas' care, the spear, though deep infix'd,
  Stopp'd short of life, nor with his entrails mix'd.

  The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
  Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew):
  "Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,
  Fate calls thee hence and finish'd is thy race.
  Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
  But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
  And add one spectre to the realms below!"

  He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
  Trembling gave way, and turn'd his back to flight;
  Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
  And held its passage through the panting heart:
  Wide in his breast appear'd the grisly wound;
  He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
  Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
  "Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
  There ends thy narrow span assign'd by fate,
  Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
  Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
  Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
  But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
  And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
  Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
  With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb."

  Then raging with intolerable smart,
  He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
  The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
  And gladden'd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
  Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
  Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
  Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
  The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:
  Alarm'd, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
  Who shares his labours, and defends his side:
  "O friend! Ulysses' shouts invade my ear;
  Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;
  Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all,
  Oppress'd by multitudes, the best may fall.
  Greece robb'd of him must bid her host despair,
  And feel a loss not ages can repair."

  Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends;
  Great Ajax, like the god of war, attends,
  The prudent chief in sore distress they found,
  With bands of furious Trojans compass'd round.(223)
  As when some huntsman, with a flying spear,
  From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer;
  Down his cleft side, while fresh the blood distils,
  He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills,
  Till life's warm vapour issuing through the wound,
  Wild mountain-wolves the fainting beast surround:
  Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade,
  The lion rushes through the woodland shade,
  The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;
  The lordly savage vindicates his prey.
  Ulysses thus, unconquer'd by his pains,
  A single warrior half a host sustains:
  But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield,
  The scattered crowds fly frighted o'er the field;
  Atrides' arm the sinking hero stays,
  And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.

  Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew;
  And first Doryclus, Priam's son, he slew,
  On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound,
  And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.
  As when a torrent, swell'd with wintry rains,
  Pours from the mountains o'er the deluged plains,
  And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn,
  A country's ruins! to the seas are borne:
  Fierce Ajax thus o'erwhelms the yielding throng;
  Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along.

  But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far,
  Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war:
  Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain,
  And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.
  There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
  The warrior's fury; there the battle glows;
  There fierce on foot, or from the chariot's height,
  His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
  The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around,
  Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:
  In his right shoulder the broad shaft appear'd,
  And trembling Greece for her physician fear'd.
  To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:
  "Glory of Greece, old Neleus' valiant son!
  Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,
  And great Machaon to the ships convey;
  A wise physician skill'd our wounds to heal,
  Is more than armies to the public weal."
  Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode
  The wounded offspring of the healing god.
  He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet
  Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.

  But now Cebriones, from Hector's car,
  Survey'd the various fortune of the war:
  "While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain,
  Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
  Before great Ajax see the mingled throng
  Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
  I know him well, distinguish'd o'er the field
  By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
  Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,
  There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds;
  There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,
  And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight."

  Thus having spoke, the driver's lash resounds;
  Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;
  Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields,
  O'er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
  The horses' hoofs are bathed in heroes' gore,
  And, dashing, purple all the car before;
  The groaning axle sable drops distils,
  And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
  Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,
  Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light:
  (By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone.
  The ranks he scatter'd and the troops o'erthrown:)
  Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate,
  And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.
  But partial Jove, espousing Hector's part,
  Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecian's heart;
  Confused, unnerved in Hector's presence grown,
  Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own.
  O'er his broad back his moony shield he threw,
  And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew.
  Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains,
  Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains;
  Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls,
  Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls,
  Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires;
  Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires:
  So turn'd stern Ajax, by whole hosts repell'd,
  While his swoln heart at every step rebell'd.

  As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued,
  In some wide field by troops of boys pursued,
  Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain,
  Crops the tall harvest, and lays waste the plain;
  Thick on his hide the hollow blows resound,
  The patient animal maintains his ground,
  Scarce from the field with all their efforts chased,
  And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last:
  On Ajax thus a weight of Trojans hung,
  The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung;
  Confiding now in bulky strength he stands,
  Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands;
  Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,
  And threats his followers with retorted eye.
  Fix'd as the bar between two warring powers,
  While hissing darts descend in iron showers:
  In his broad buckler many a weapon stood,
  Its surface bristled with a quivering wood;
  And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain,
  Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain.
  But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts,
  And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts;
  Whose eager javelin launch'd against the foe,
  Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow;
  From his torn liver the red current flow'd,
  And his slack knees desert their dying load.
  The victor rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Paris' bow a vengeful arrow fled;
  Fix'd in his nervous thigh the weapon stood,
  Fix'd was the point, but broken was the wood.
  Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired,
  Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:

  "What god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismay'd?
  Oh, turn to arms; 'tis Ajax claims your aid.
  This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,
  And this the last brave battle he shall wage:
  Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave
  The warrior rescue, and your country save."
  Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
  Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
  To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
  With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
  Each takes new courage at the hero's sight;
  The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

  Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
  While Nestor's chariot far from fight retires:
  His coursers steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gore,
  The Greeks' preserver, great Machaon, bore.
  That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
  Of his proud fleet, o'erlook'd the fields of fight;
  His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
  The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
  His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
  A transient pity touch'd his vengeful breast.
  Straight to Menoetius' much-loved son he sent:
  Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
  In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
  And fix'd the date of all his woes to come.

  "Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
  Whate'er thy will, Patroclus shall obey."

  "O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
  Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
  The time is come, when yon despairing host
  Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
  Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
  And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
  Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
  What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
  For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
  His form recall'd Machaon to my mind;
  Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face,
  The coursers pass'd me with so swift a pace."

  The hero said. His friend obey'd with haste,
  Through intermingled ships and tents he pass'd;
  The chiefs descending from their car he found:
  The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.
  The warriors standing on the breezy shore,
  To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore,
  Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale
  Convey'd that freshness the cool seas exhale;
  Then to consult on farther methods went,
  And took their seats beneath the shady tent.
  The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,
  Arsinous' daughter, graced with golden hairs:
  (Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave,
  Greece, as the prize of Nestor's wisdom gave:)
  A table first with azure feet she placed;
  Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced;
  Honey new-press'd, the sacred flour of wheat,
  And wholesome garlic, crown'd the savoury treat,
  Next her white hand an antique goblet brings,
  A goblet sacred to the Pylian kings
  From eldest times: emboss'd with studs of gold,
  Two feet support it, and four handles hold;
  On each bright handle, bending o'er the brink,
  In sculptured gold, two turtles seem to drink:
  A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,
  When the brisk nectar overlook'd the brim.
  Temper'd in this, the nymph of form divine
  Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine;
  With goat's-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows,
  And last with flour the smiling surface strows:
  This for the wounded prince the dame prepares:
  The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares:
  Salubrious draughts the warriors' thirst allay,
  And pleasing conference beguiles the day.

  Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent,
  Unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
  Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led
  To his high seat: the chief refused and said:

  "'Tis now no season for these kind delays;
  The great Achilles with impatience stays.
  To great Achilles this respect I owe;
  Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe,
  Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?
  With grief I see the great Machaon bleeds.
  This to report, my hasty course I bend;
  Thou know'st the fiery temper of my friend."
  "Can then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoin'd)
  Excite compassion in Achilles' mind?
  Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know?
  This is not half the story of our woe.
  Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone,
  Our bravest heroes in the navy groan,
  Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
  And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
  But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
  Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain:
  Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays,
  And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
  Chief after chief the raging foe destroys;
  Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
  Now the slow course of all-impairing time
  Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;
  Oh! had I still that strength my youth possess'd,
  When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppress'd,
  The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,
  And stretch'd the great Itymonaeus dead!
  Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,
  And ours was all the plunder of the plains:
  Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,
  As many goats, as many lowing kine:
  And thrice the number of unrivall'd steeds,
  All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
  These, as my first essay of arms, I won;
  Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
  Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored,
  And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
  The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair,
  When the proud Elians first commenced the war:
  For Neleus' sons Alcides' rage had slain;
  Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
  Oppress'd, we arm'd; and now this conquest gain'd,
  My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain'd.
  (That large reprisal he might justly claim,
  For prize defrauded, and insulted fame,
  When Elis' monarch, at the public course,
  Detain'd his chariot, and victorious horse.)
  The rest the people shared; myself survey'd
  The just partition, and due victims paid.
  Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,
  With many a courser, and with many a car;
  The sons of Actor at their army's head
  (Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
  High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,
  Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:
  Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow:
  The stream they pass'd, and pitch'd their tents below.
  Pallas, descending in the shades of night,
  Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.
  Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride,
  Myself the foremost; but my sire denied;
  Fear'd for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;
  And stopp'd my chariot, and detain'd my arms.
  My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled
  Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.

  "Along fair Arene's delightful plain
  Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main:
  There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,
  And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
  Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,
  To great Alphaeus' sacred source we came.
  There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid;
  An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;
  A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain
  To the blue monarch of the watery main.
  In arms we slept, beside the winding flood,
  While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.
  Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray,
  Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
  Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear;
  The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
  The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;
  King Augias' son, and spouse of Agamede:
  (She that all simples' healing virtues knew,
  And every herb that drinks the morning dew:)
  I seized his car, the van of battle led;
  The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
  The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill'd,
  Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field:
  Full fifty captive chariots graced my train;
  Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
  Then Actor's sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
  The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
  O'er heapy shields, and o'er the prostrate throng,
  Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along,
  Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,
  Where o'er the vales the Olenian rocks arose;
  Till Pallas stopp'd us where Alisium flows.
  Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay,
  And the same arm that led concludes the day;
  Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
  There to high Jove were public thanks assign'd,
  As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind.
  Such then I was, impell'd by youthful blood;
  So proved my valour for my country's good.

  "Achilles with unactive fury glows,
  And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.
  How shall he grieve, when to the eternal shade
  Her hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid!
  0 friend! my memory recalls the day,
  When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea,
  I, and Ulysses, touch'd at Phthia's port,
  And entered Peleus' hospitable court.
  A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice,
  And pour'd libations on the flaming thighs.
  Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire
  Menoetius, turn'd the fragments on the fire.
  Achilles sees us, to the feast invites;
  Social we sit, and share the genial rites.
  We then explained the cause on which we came,
  Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame.
  Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave;
  Peleus said only this:--'My son! be brave.'
  Menoetius thus: 'Though great Achilles shine
  In strength superior, and of race divine,
  Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend;
  Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.'
  Thus spoke your father at Thessalia's court:
  Words now forgot, though now of vast import.
  Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say:
  Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey;
  Some favouring god Achilles' heart may move;
  Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.
  If some dire oracle his breast alarm,
  If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm,
  Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
  If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line;
  Clad in Achilles' arms, if thou appear,
  Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from war;
  Press'd by fresh forces, her o'er-labour'd train
  Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again."

  This touch'd his generous heart, and from the tent
  Along the shore with hasty strides he went;
  Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand,
  The public mart and courts of justice stand,
  Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies,
  And altars to the guardian gods arise;
  There, sad, he met the brave Euaemon's son,
  Large painful drops from all his members run;
  An arrow's head yet rooted in his wound,
  The sable blood in circles mark'd the ground.
  As faintly reeling he confess'd the smart,
  Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
  Divine compassion touch'd Patroclus' breast,
  Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend address'd:

  "Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
  Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
  Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,
  Far from your friends, and from your native shore?
  Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
  Resists she yet the raging Hector's hand?
  Or are her heroes doom'd to die with shame,
  And this the period of our wars and fame?"

  Eurypylus replies: "No more, my friend;
  Greece is no more! this day her glories end;
  Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues,
  Her force increasing as her toil renews.
  Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet,
  Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
  But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,
  Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart;
  With lukewarm water wash the gore away;
  With healing balms the raging smart allay,
  Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,
  Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
  Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands
  This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands;
  And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,
  Now wants that succour which so oft he lent."

  To him the chief: "What then remains to do?
  The event of things the gods alone can view.
  Charged by Achilles' great command I fly,
  And bear with haste the Pylian king's reply:
  But thy distress this instant claims relief."
  He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
  The slaves their master's slow approach survey'd,
  And hides of oxen on the floor display'd:
  There stretch'd at length the wounded hero lay;
  Patroclus cut the forky steel away:
  Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised;
  The wound he wash'd, the styptic juice infused.
  The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow,
  The wound to torture, and the blood to flow.

                        [Illustration: HERCULES.]

                                HERCULES.





BOOK XII.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN WALL.

The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts to
force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas advises
to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. The Trojans follow
his counsel; and having divided their army into five bodies of foot, begin
the assault. But upon the signal of an eagle with a serpent in his talons,
which appeared on the left hand of the Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to
withdraw them again. This Hector opposes, and continues the attack; in
which, after many actions, Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall.
Hector also, casting a stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates,
and enters at the head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians
even to their ships.

  While thus the hero's pious cares attend
  The cure and safety of his wounded friend,
  Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage,
  And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
  Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose;
  With gods averse the ill-fated works arose;
  Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,
  The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.

  Without the gods, how short a period stands
  The proudest monument of mortal hands!
  This stood while Hector and Achilles raged.
  While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
  But when her sons were slain, her city burn'd,
  And what survived of Greece to Greece return'd;
  Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore,
  Then Ida's summits pour'd their watery store;
  Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills,
  Caresus roaring down the stony hills,
  Csepus, Granicus, with mingled force,
  And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;
  And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main(224)
  Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:
  These, turn'd by Phoebus from their wonted ways,
  Deluged the rampire nine continual days;
  The weight of waters saps the yielding wall,
  And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall.
  Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,
  And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
  The god of ocean, marching stern before,
  With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore,
  Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves,
  And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
  Now smooth'd with sand, and levell'd by the flood,
  No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;
  In their old bounds the rivers roll again,
  Shine 'twixt the hills, or wander o'er the plain.(225)

  But this the gods in later times perform;
  As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm;
  The strokes yet echoed of contending powers;
  War thunder'd at the gates, and blood distain'd the towers.
  Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay,
  Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay:
  Hector's approach in every wind they hear,
  And Hector's fury every moment fear.
  He, like a whirlwind, toss'd the scattering throng,
  Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.
  So 'midst the dogs and hunters' daring bands,
  Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands;
  Arm'd foes around a dreadful circle form,
  And hissing javelins rain an iron storm:
  His powers untamed, their bold assault defy,
  And where he turns the rout disperse or die:
  He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,
  And if he falls, his courage makes him fall.
  With equal rage encompass'd Hector glows;
  Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
  The panting steeds impatient fury breathe,
  And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;
  Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground,
  And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
  Eager they view'd the prospect dark and deep,
  Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep;
  The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)
  And bristled thick with sharpen'd stakes below.
  The foot alone this strong defence could force,
  And try the pass impervious to the horse.
  This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
  Restrain'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
  And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
  What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find,
  The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
  No pass through those, without a thousand wounds,
  No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
  Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown,
  On certain dangers we too rashly run:
  If 'tis will our haughty foes to tame,
  Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!
  Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall,
  And one great day destroy and bury all!
  But should they turn, and here oppress our train,
  What hopes, what methods of retreat remain?
  Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,
  In one promiscuous carnage crush'd and bruised,
  All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,
  Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
  Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed;
  Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;
  Then all alighting, wedged in firm array,
  Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
  So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power,
  And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour."

                [Illustration: POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.]

                        POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.


  This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung
  Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.
  The chief's example follow'd by his train,
  Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,
  By orders strict the charioteers enjoin'd
  Compel the coursers to their ranks behind.
  The forces part in five distinguish'd bands,
  And all obey their several chiefs' commands.
  The best and bravest in the first conspire,
  Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire:
  Great Hector glorious in the van of these,
  Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
  Before the next the graceful Paris shines,
  And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
  The sons of Priam with the third appear,
  Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer;
  In arms with these the mighty Asius stood,
  Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood,
  And whom Arisba's yellow coursers bore,
  The coursers fed on Selle's winding shore.
  Antenor's sons the fourth battalion guide,
  And great Cneas, born on fountful Ide.
  Divine Sarpedon the last band obey'd,
  Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.
  Next him, the bravest, at their army's head,
  But he more brave than all the hosts he led.

  Now with compacted shields in close array,
  The moving legions speed their headlong way:
  Already in their hopes they fire the fleet,
  And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.

  While every Trojan thus, and every aid,
  The advice of wise Polydamas obey'd,
  Asius alone, confiding in his car,
  His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.
  Unhappy hero! and advised in vain;
  Those wheels returning ne'er shall mark the plain;
  No more those coursers with triumphant joy
  Restore their master to the gates of Troy!
  Black death attends behind the Grecian wall,
  And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
  Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain
  The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain;
  Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass'd,
  The gates half-open'd to receive the last.
  Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
  His following host with clamours rend the skies:
  To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
  Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

  To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
  Who from the Lapiths' warlike race descend;
  This Polypoetes, great Perithous' heir,
  And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
  As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
  Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
  Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown'd,
  Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
  High on the hills appears their stately form,
  And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
  So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
  Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
  Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
  And OEnomaus and Thoon close the rear:
  In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
  In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
  The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
  To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
  Even when they saw Troy's sable troops impend,
  And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
  Forth from the portals rush'd the intrepid pair,
  Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
  So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
  Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
  On every side the crackling trees they tear,
  And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
  They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
  Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
  Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
  With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
  Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
  Maintain'd the walls, and mann'd the lofty towers:
  To save their fleet their last efforts they try,
  And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.

  As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
  The dreary winter on his frozen wings;
  Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow
  Descend, and whiten all the fields below:
  So fast the darts on either army pour,
  So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower:
  Heavy, and thick, resound the batter'd shields,
  And the deaf echo rattles round the fields.

  With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven,
  The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven:
  "In powers immortal who shall now believe?
  Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive?
  What man could doubt but Troy's victorious power
  Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?
  But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive,
  To guard the entrance of their common hive,
  Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings
  They strike the assailants, and infix their stings;
  A race determined, that to death contend:
  So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend.
  Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates,
  Repel an army, and defraud the fates?"

  These empty accents mingled with the wind,
  Nor moved great Jove's unalterable mind;
  To godlike Hector and his matchless might
  Was owed the glory of the destined fight.
  Like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried,
  And all the gates sustain'd an equal tide;
  Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
  The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appear'd.
  The spirit of a god my breast inspire,
  To raise each act to life, and sing with fire!
  While Greece unconquer'd kept alive the war,
  Secure of death, confiding in despair;
  And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay,
  With unassisting arms deplored the day.

  Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain
  The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
  First Damasus, by Polypoetes' steel,
  Pierced through his helmet's brazen visor, fell;
  The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore!
  The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
  Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath:
  Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death;
  First through the belt Hippomachus he gored,
  Then sudden waved his unresisted sword:
  Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke,
  The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke:
  Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled;
  And round him rose a monument of dead.
  Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew,
  Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue;
  Fierce with impatience on the works to fall,
  And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.
  These on the farther bank now stood and gazed,
  By Heaven alarm'd, by prodigies amazed:
  A signal omen stopp'd the passing host,
  Their martial fury in their wonder lost.
  Jove's bird on sounding pinions beat the skies;
  A bleeding serpent of enormous size,
  His talons truss'd; alive, and curling round,
  He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound:
  Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,
  In airy circles wings his painful way,
  Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries:
  Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies.
  They, pale with terror, mark its spires unroll'd,
  And Jove's portent with beating hearts behold.
  Then first Polydamas the silence broke,
  Long weigh'd the signal, and to Hector spoke:

  "How oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear,
  For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?
  True to those counsels which I judge the best,
  I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.
  To speak his thoughts is every freeman's right,
  In peace, in war, in council, and in fight;
  And all I move, deferring to thy sway,
  But tends to raise that power which I obey.
  Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain!
  Seek not this day the Grecian ships to gain;
  For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent,
  And thus my mind explains its clear event:
  The victor eagle, whose sinister flight
  Retards our host, and fills our hearts with fright,
  Dismiss'd his conquest in the middle skies,
  Allow'd to seize, but not possess the prize;
  Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian fleet,
  Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet,
  Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed;
  More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed.
  So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise;
  For thus a skilful seer would read the skies."

  To him then Hector with disdain return'd:
  (Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burn'd:)
  "Are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
  Thy will is partial, not thy reason wrong:
  Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent,
  Sure heaven resumes the little sense it lent.
  What coward counsels would thy madness move
  Against the word, the will reveal'd of Jove?
  The leading sign, the irrevocable nod,
  And happy thunders of the favouring god,
  These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind
  By wandering birds that flit with every wind?
  Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend,
  Or where the suns arise, or where descend;
  To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
  While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
  Without a sign his sword the brave man draws,
  And asks no omen but his country's cause.
  But why should'st thou suspect the war's success?
  None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
  Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
  Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
  Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
  But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
  Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
  Spread their cold poison through our soldiers' breasts,
  My javelin can revenge so base a part,
  And free the soul that quivers in thy heart."

  Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall,
  Calls on his host; his host obey the call;
  With ardour follow where their leader flies:
  Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
  Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,
  And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide;
  He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,
  And gives great Hector the predestined day.
  Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,
  Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
  In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
  While these they undermine, and those they rend;
  Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall;
  And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
  Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms;
  The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms,
  Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;
  Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
  The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,
  And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power.
  The generous impulse every Greek obeys;
  Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.

  "Fellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame,
  And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
  Since not alike endued with force or art;
  Behold a day when each may act his part!
  A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
  To gain new glories, or augment the old.
  Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
  Drown Hector's vaunts in loud exhorts of fight;
  Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all;
  Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall;
  So Jove once more may drive their routed train,
  And Troy lie trembling in her walls again."

  Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers;
  And now the stones descend in heavier showers.
  As when high Jove his sharp artillery forms,
  And opes his cloudy magazine of storms;
  In winter's bleak un comfortable reign,
  A snowy inundation hides the plain;
  He stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep;
  Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep;
  And first the mountain-tops are cover'd o'er,
  Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
  Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,
  And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
  The circling seas, alone absorbing all,
  Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall:
  So from each side increased the stony rain,
  And the white ruin rises o'er the plain.

  Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend
  To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:
  Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
  Till great Sarpedon tower'd amid the field;
  For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame
  His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
  In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
  And bears aloft his ample shield in air;
  Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were roll'd,
  Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold:
  And while two pointed javelins arm his hands,
  Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands.

  So press'd with hunger, from the mountain's brow
  Descends a lion on the flocks below;
  So stalks the lordly savage o'er the plain,
  In sullen majesty, and stern disdain:
  In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,
  And shepherds gall him with an iron war;
  Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;
  He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.

  Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows
  With generous rage that drives him on the foes.
  He views the towers, and meditates their fall,
  To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall;
  Then casting on his friend an ardent look,
  Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke:

  "Why boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,(226)
  Where Xanthus' streams enrich the Lycian plain,
  Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field,
  And hills where vines their purple harvest yield,
  Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crown'd,
  Our feasts enhanced with music's sprightly sound?
  Why on those shores are we with joy survey'd,
  Admired as heroes, and as gods obey'd,
  Unless great acts superior merit prove,
  And vindicate the bounteous powers above?
  'Tis ours, the dignity they give to grace;
  The first in valour, as the first in place;
  That when with wondering eyes our martial bands
  Behold our deeds transcending our commands,
  Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state,
  Whom those that envy dare not imitate!
  Could all our care elude the gloomy grave,
  Which claims no less the fearful and the brave,
  For lust of fame I should not vainly dare
  In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
  But since, alas! ignoble age must come,
  Disease, and death's inexorable doom
  The life, which others pay, let us bestow,
  And give to fame what we to nature owe;
  Brave though we fall, and honour'd if we live,
  Or let us glory gain, or glory give!"

  He said; his words the listening chief inspire
  With equal warmth, and rouse the warrior's fire;
  The troops pursue their leaders with delight,
  Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.
  Menestheus from on high the storm beheld
  Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field:
  Around the walls he gazed, to view from far
  What aid appear'd to avert the approaching war,
  And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
  Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
  In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
  Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
  The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
  Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground
  Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
  And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
  Their strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
  Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
  The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
  And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
  Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
  "Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
  Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
  Your strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
  At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
  And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
  "Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
  And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
  To you I trust the fortune of the field,
  Till by this arm the foe shall be repell'd:
  That done, expect me to complete the day
  Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.
  With equal steps bold Teucer press'd the shore,
  Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

  High on the walls appear'd the Lycian powers,
  Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
  The Greeks, oppress'd, their utmost force unite,
  Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:
  The war renews, mix'd shouts and groans arise;
  Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
  Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades,
  And sends the brave Epicles to the shades,
  Sarpedon's friend. Across the warrior's way,
  Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay;
  In modern ages not the strongest swain
  Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain:
  He poised, and swung it round; then toss'd on high,
  It flew with force, and labour'd up the sky;
  Full on the Lycian's helmet thundering down,
  The ponderous ruin crush'd his batter'd crown.
  As skilful divers from some airy steep
  Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep,
  So falls Epicles; then in groans expires,
  And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.

  While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
  From Teucer's hand a winged arrow flew;
  The bearded shaft the destined passage found,
  And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
  The chief, who fear'd some foe's insulting boast
  Might stop the progress of his warlike host,
  Conceal'd the wound, and, leaping from his height
  Retired reluctant from the unfinish'd fight.
  Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld
  Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field;
  His beating breast with generous ardour glows,
  He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
  Alcmaon first was doom'd his force to feel;
  Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;
  Then from the yawning wound with fury tore
  The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Swift to the battlement the victor flies,
  Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies:
  It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;
  The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
  A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;
  And, like a deluge, rushes in the war.
  At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,
  And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe;
  Fix'd in his belt the feather'd weapon stood,
  And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
  But Jove was present in the dire debate,
  To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
  The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
  But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
  Then raised with hope, and fired with glory's charms,
  His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
  "O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
  Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
  The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
  Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
  Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
  The force of powerful union conquers all."

  This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
  They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
  Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
  And fix'd support the weight of all the war;
  Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
  Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
  As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
  Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
  They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
  One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
  Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
  Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
  Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
  Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
  The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
  And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

  As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
  From side to side the trembling balance nods,
  (While some laborious matron, just and poor,
  With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
  Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
  Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:(227)
  So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
  With fates prevailing, turn'd the scale of fight.
  Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
  And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
  "Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
  Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!"
  They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call,
  Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall:
  Around the works a wood of glittering spears
  Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
  A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:
  Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
  The snowy fleece, he toss'd, and shook in air;
  For Jove upheld, and lighten'd of its load
  The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
  Thus arm'd, before the folded gates he came,
  Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;
  With iron bars and brazen hinges strong,
  On lofty beams of solid timber hung:
  Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway,
  Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,
  The folds are shatter'd; from the crackling door
  Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
  Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
  Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:(228)
  A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living flame.
  He moves a god, resistless in his course,
  And seems a match for more than mortal force.
  Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
  A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
  The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
  The shore is heap'd with death, and tumult rends the sky.

                       [Illustration: GREEK ALTAR.]

                               GREEK ALTAR.





BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE ACTS
OF IDOMENEUS.

Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the station
of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires those heroes to
oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals, encourages the other
Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The Ajaces form their troops in a
close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector and the Trojans. Several deeds of
valour are performed; Meriones, losing his spear in the encounter, repairs
to seek another at the tent of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation
between those two warriors, who return together to the battle. Idomeneus
signalizes his courage above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and
Alcathous: Deiphobus and Cneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus
retires. Menelaus wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are
repulsed on the left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the
Ajaces, till, being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas
advises to call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes
first to rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax
again, and renews the attack.

The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between the
Grecian wall and the sea-shore.

  When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast
  Had fix'd great Hector and his conquering host,
  He left them to the fates, in bloody fray
  To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
  Then turn'd to Thracia from the field of fight
  Those eyes that shed insufferable light,
  To where the Mysians prove their martial force,
  And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;
  And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays,
  Renown'd for justice and for length of days;(229)
  Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
  From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food:
  Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene
  Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men:
  No aid, he deems, to either host is given,
  While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven.

  Meantime the monarch of the watery main
  Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
  In Samothracia, on a mountain's brow,
  Whose waving woods o'erhung the deeps below,
  He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
  Where Ida's misty tops confusedly rise;
  Below, fair Ilion's glittering spires were seen;
  The crowded ships and sable seas between.
  There, from the crystal chambers of the main
  Emerged, he sat, and mourn'd his Argives slain.
  At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
  Prone down the rocky steep he rush'd along;
  Fierce as he pass'd, the lofty mountains nod,
  The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
  And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
  From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
  And, at the fourth, the distant Cgae shook.

  Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
  Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
  This having reach'd, his brass-hoof'd steeds he reins,
  Fleet as the winds, and deck'd with golden manes.
  Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
  Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
  He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
  He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
  His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;
  The enormous monsters rolling o'er the deep
  Gambol around him on the watery way,
  And heavy whales in awkward measures play;
  The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,
  Exults, and owns the monarch of the main;
  The parting waves before his coursers fly;
  The wondering waters leave his axle dry.

  Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,
  Between where Tenedos the surges lave,
  And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:
  There the great ruler of the azure round
  Stopp'd his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,
  Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand,
  And link'd their fetlocks with a golden band,
  Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:
  The father of the floods pursues his way:
  Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,
  Or fiery deluge that devours the ground,
  The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,
  Embattled roll'd, as Hector rush'd along:
  To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry
  The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply:
  They vow destruction to the Grecian name,
  And in their hopes the fleets already flame.

  But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,
  The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground,
  Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen,
  Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;
  His shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
  But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.

               [Illustration: NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.]

                       NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA.


  "'Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
  Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
  'Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
  Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
  On other works though Troy with fury fall,
  And pour her armies o'er our batter'd wall:
  There Greece has strength: but this, this part o'erthrown,
  Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
  Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
  Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
  If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
  Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
  Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
  And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

  Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
  Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
  Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
  Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
  Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
  Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
  Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
  Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
  The wide horizon shut him from their view.

  The inspiring god Oileus' active son
  Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

  "Some god, my friend, some god in human form
  Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
  Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
  Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
  I mark'd his parting, and the steps he trod;
  His own bright evidence reveals a god.
  Even now some energy divine I share,
  And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!"

  "With equal ardour (Telamon returns)
  My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
  New rising spirits all my force alarm,
  Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
  This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
  The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
  Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
  And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet."

  Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
  The heroes thus their mutual warmth express'd.
  Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
  Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
  Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
  And swarms victorious o'er their yielding walls:
  Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
  While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
  Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
  But breathe new courage as they feel the power.
  Teucer and Leitus first his words excite;
  Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;
  Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renown'd,
  And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;
  Last Nestor's son the same bold ardour takes,
  While thus the god the martial fire awakes:

  "Oh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace
  To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
  I trusted in the gods, and you, to see
  Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free:
  Ah, no--the glorious combat you disclaim,
  And one black day clouds all her former fame.
  Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,
  Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
  Fly we at length from Troy's oft-conquer'd bands?
  And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
  A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,
  Not born to glories of the dusty plain;
  Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
  A prey to every savage of the wood:
  Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
  Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
  A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
  The soldiers' baseness, or the general's fault?
  Fools! will ye perish for your leader's vice;
  The purchase infamy, and life the price?
  'Tis not your cause, Achilles' injured fame:
  Another's is the crime, but yours the shame.
  Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
  Must you be cowards, if your king's unjust?
  Prevent this evil, and your country save:
  Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
  Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
  I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
  But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
  My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
  Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
  A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
  Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath,
  On endless infamy, on instant death:
  For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore:
  Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
  Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;
  The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall."

  These words the Grecians' fainting hearts inspire,
  And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
  Fix'd at his post was each bold Ajax found,
  With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:
  So close their order, so disposed their fight,
  As Pallas' self might view with fix'd delight;
  Or had the god of war inclined his eyes,
  The god of war had own'd a just surprise.
  A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate,
  Descending Hector and his battle wait.
  An iron scene gleams dreadful o'er the fields,
  Armour in armour lock'd, and shields in shields,
  Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,
  Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
  The floating plumes unnumber'd wave above,
  As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove;
  And levell'd at the skies with pointing rays,
  Their brandish'd lances at each motion blaze.

  Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
  The close compacted legions urged their way:
  Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
  Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
  As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
  A rock's round fragment flies, with fury borne,
  (Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
  Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
  From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
  At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
  Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain,
  Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
  There stops--so Hector. Their whole force he proved,(230)
  Resistless when he raged, and, when he stopp'd, unmoved.

  On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,
  And all their falchions wave around his head:
  Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires;
  But with repeated shouts his army fires.
  "Trojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way
  Through yon square body, and that black array:
  Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power,
  Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower;
  For he that Juno's heavenly bosom warms,
  The first of gods, this day inspires our arms."

  He said; and roused the soul in every breast:
  Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest,
  Forth march'd Deiphobus; but, marching, held
  Before his wary steps his ample shield.
  Bold Merion aim'd a stroke (nor aim'd it wide);
  The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;
  But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand,
  The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
  The Trojan warrior, touch'd with timely fear,
  On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
  The Greek, retreating, mourn'd his frustrate blow,
  And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe;
  Then to the ships with surly speed he went,
  To seek a surer javelin in his tent.

  Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows,
  The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
  By Teucer's arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
  The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
  Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led,
  In fair Pedaeus' verdant pastures bred,
  The youth had dwelt, remote from war's alarms,
  And blest in bright Medesicaste's arms:
  (This nymph, the fruit of Priam's ravish'd joy,
  Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:)
  To Troy, when glory call'd his arms, he came,
  And match'd the bravest of her chiefs in fame:
  With Priam's sons, a guardian of the throne,
  He lived, beloved and honour'd as his own.
  Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
  He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
  As from some far-seen mountain's airy crown,
  Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
  And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
  So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
  Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Hector's hand a shining javelin fled:
  He saw, and shunn'd the death; the forceful dart
  Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus's heart,
  Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
  Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
  Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
  To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
  And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
  When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
  Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
  He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
  Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
  Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
  The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
  Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
  (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
  Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
  Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
  As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
  Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
  In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
  And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
  So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
  Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
  Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
  At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

  The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
  And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
  Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
  And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
  Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
  He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
  His pensive brow the generous care express'd
  With which a wounded soldier touch'd his breast,
  Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
  And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
  Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
  That office paid, he issued from his tent
  Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
  In Thoas' voice, Andraemon's valiant son,
  Who ruled where Calydon's white rocks arise,
  And Pleuron's chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

  "Where's now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
  Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?"

  To whom the king: "On Greece no blame be thrown;
  Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.
  Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains
  Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:
  'Tis heaven, alas! and Jove's all-powerful doom,
  That far, far distant from our native home
  Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!
  Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend
  Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best,
  And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest."

  Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Ah! never may he see his native land,
  But feed the vultures on this hateful strand,
  Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,
  Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
  For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,
  And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
  Together let us battle on the plain;
  Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain:
  Not vain the weakest, if their force unite;
  But ours, the bravest have confess'd in fight."

  This said, he rushes where the combat burns;
  Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:
  From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand,
  And clad in arms that lighten'd all the strand,
  Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,
  Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove,
  Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,
  Or terrifies the offending world with wars;
  In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,
  From pole to pole the trail of glory flies:
  Thus his bright armour o'er the dazzled throng
  Gleam'd dreadful, as the monarch flash'd along.

  Him, near his tent, Meriones attends;
  Whom thus he questions: "Ever best of friends!
  O say, in every art of battle skill'd,
  What holds thy courage from so brave a field?
  On some important message art thou bound,
  Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
  Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,
  And glows with prospects of th' approaching day."

  "O prince! (Meriones replies) whose care
  Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war;
  This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
  The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield."

  To whom the Cretan: "Enter, and receive
  The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
  Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
  That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
  Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
  Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
  Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
  And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
  Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll'd,
  And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold."

  "Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
  We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
  But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
  I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
  What need I more? If any Greek there be
  Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee."

  To this, Idomeneus: "The fields of fight
  Have proved thy valour, and unconquer'd might:
  And were some ambush for the foes design'd,
  Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
  In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
  The fear of each, or valour, stands confess'd.
  No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
  He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
  A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
  Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
  Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
  With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
  And looks a bloodless image of despair!
  Not so the brave--still dauntless, still the same,
  Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
  Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
  And fix'd his soul, to conquer or to die:
  If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
  'Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.

  "In such assays thy blameless worth is known,
  And every art of dangerous war thy own.
  By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
  Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
  Such as may teach, 'twas still thy brave delight
  T'oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
  But why, like infants, cold to honour's charms,
  Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms?
  Go--from my conquer'd spears the choicest take,
  And to their owners send them nobly back."

  Swift at the word bold Merion snatch'd a spear
  And, breathing slaughter, follow'd to the war.
  So Mars armipotent invades the plain,
  (The wide destroyer of the race of man,)
  Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course,
  Arm'd with stern boldness, and enormous force;
  The pride of haughty warriors to confound,
  And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:
  From Thrace they fly, call'd to the dire alarms
  Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms;
  Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,
  To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those.
  So march'd the leaders of the Cretan train,
  And their bright arms shot horror o'er the plain.

  Then first spake Merion: "Shall we join the right,
  Or combat in the centre of the fight?
  Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
  Hazard and fame all parts alike attend."

  "Not in the centre (Idomen replied:)
  Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide;
  Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,
  And gallant Teucer deals destruction there,
  Skill'd or with shafts to gall the distant field,
  Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
  These can the rage of haughty Hector tame:
  Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,
  Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed,
  And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
  Great must he be, of more than human birth,
  Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth.
  Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,
  Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
  In standing fight he mates Achilles' force,
  Excell'd alone in swiftness in the course.
  Then to the left our ready arms apply,
  And live with glory, or with glory die."

  He said: and Merion to th' appointed place,
  Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
  Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld
  Rush like a fiery torrent o'er the field,
  Their force embodied in a tide they pour;
  The rising combat sounds along the shore.
  As warring winds, in Sirius' sultry reign,
  From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;
  On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise,
  And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:
  Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
  Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken'd heaven.
  All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
  Bristled with upright spears, that flash'd afar;
  Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
  And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
  Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

  Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
  And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
  The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
  Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
  But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
  While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
  Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
  And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
  Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
  Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
  But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
  And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
  For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
  Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
  These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
  In war and discord's adamantine chain,
  Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
  Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

  Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
  The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
  First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
  Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
  From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
  Cassandra's love he sought, with boasts of power,
  And promised conquest was the proffer'd dower.
  The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
  The king consented, but the fates refused.
  Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
  The field he measured with a larger stride.
  Him as he stalk'd, the Cretan javelin found;
  Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
  His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
  His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
  The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
  "And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
  Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
  And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
  Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;
  For such an aid what will not Argos give?
  To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join,
  And count Atrides' fairest daughter thine.
  Meantime, on further methods to advise,
  Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;
  There hear what Greece has on her part to say."
  He spoke, and dragg'd the gory corse away.
  This Asius view'd, unable to contain,
  Before his chariot warring on the plain:
  (His crowded coursers, to his squire consign'd,
  Impatient panted on his neck behind:)
  To vengeance rising with a sudden spring,
  He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
  The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near,
  Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:
  Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide,
  And glitter'd, extant at the further side.
  As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral,
  Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
  Then spreads a length of ruin o'er the ground:
  So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,
  And stretch'd before his much-loved coursers lay.
  He grinds the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
  And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
  Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear,
  Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,
  Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away,
  But falls transfix'd, an unresisting prey:
  Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
  The stately car, and labours out his breath.
  Thus Asius' steeds (their mighty master gone)
  Remain the prize of Nestor's youthful son.

  Stabb'd at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
  And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
  The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance
  From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
  Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,
  Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,
  On his raised arm by two strong braces stay'd,)
  He lay collected in defensive shade.
  O'er his safe head the javelin idly sung,
  And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
  Even then the spear the vigorous arm confess'd,
  And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor's breast:
  Warm'd in his liver, to the ground it bore
  The chief, his people's guardian now no more!

  "Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
  Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
  For thee, through hell's black portals stand display'd,
  This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade."

  Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
  Touch'd every Greek, but Nestor's son the most.
  Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
  And his broad buckler shields his slaughter'd friend:
  Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
  His honour'd body to the tented shore.

  Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
  Resolved to perish in his country's cause,
  Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
  To wail his fate in death's eternal gloom.
  He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
  Great Csyetes was the hero's sire;
  His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
  Anchises' eldest hope, and darling care:
  Who charm'd her parents' and her husband's heart
  With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
  He once of Ilion's youth the loveliest boy,
  The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
  By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
  Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
  And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
  Fix'd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
  While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
  Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
  Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
  The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
  His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,
  The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;
  Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay,
  Life's purple tide impetuous gush'd away.

  Then Idomen, insulting o'er the slain:
  "Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:
  See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend;
  This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
  Approaching now thy boasted might approve,
  And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
  From Jove, enamour'd of a mortal dame,
  Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:
  Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minos' heir;
  His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:
  O'er spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,
  And thence my ships transport me through the main:
  Lord of a host, o'er all my host I shine,
  A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line."

  The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,
  Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete,
  Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed
  To call some hero to partake the deed,
  Forthwith Cneas rises to his thought:
  For him in Troy's remotest lines he sought,
  Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
  And sees superior posts in meaner hands.
  To him, ambitious of so great an aid,
  The bold Deiphobus approach'd, and said:

  "Now, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms,
  If e'er thy bosom felt fair honour's charms.
  Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend;
  Come, and the warrior's loved remains defend.
  Beneath his cares thy early youth was train'd,
  One table fed you, and one roof contain'd.
  This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
  Haste, and revenge it on th' insulting foe."

  Cneas heard, and for a space resign'd
  To tender pity all his manly mind;
  Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight:
  The Greek awaits him with collected might.
  As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
  Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
  When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
  Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
  O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
  Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
  So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
  And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
  Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
  The youthful offspring of the god of war,
  Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
  To these the warrior sent his voice around.
  "Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
  Lo, great Cneas rushes to the fight:
  Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
  He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
  Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
  The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

  He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
  Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
  Around the chief. Cneas too demands
  Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
  In order follow all th' embodied train,
  Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
  Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
  Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
  With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
  To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
  So joys Cneas, as his native band
  Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

  Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
  On every side the steely circle grows;
  Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
  And o'er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
  Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
  There great Idomeneus, Cneas here.
  Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
  And burn'd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
  The Trojan weapon whizz'd along in air;
  The Cretan saw, and shunn'd the brazen spear:
  Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood
  Stuck deep in earth, and quiver'd where it stood.
  But OEnomas received the Cretan's stroke;
  The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,
  It ripp'd his belly with a ghastly wound,
  And roll'd the smoking entrails on the ground.
  Stretch'd on the plain, he sobs away his breath,
  And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.
  The victor from his breast the weapon tears;
  His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears.
  Though now unfit an active war to wage,
  Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age,
  His listless limbs unable for the course,
  In standing fight he yet maintains his force;
  Till faint with labour, and by foes repell'd,
  His tired slow steps he drags from off the field.
  Deiphobus beheld him as he pass'd,
  And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast:
  The javelin err'd, but held its course along,
  And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:
  The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground,
  And gnash'd the dust, all bloody with his wound.

  Nor knew the furious father of his fall;
  High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall,
  On golden clouds th' immortal synod sate;
  Detain'd from bloody war by Jove and Fate.

  Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay,
  For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray,
  Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies,
  And from his temples rends the glittering prize;
  Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,
  And on his loaded arm discharged his spear:
  He drops the weight, disabled with the pain;
  The hollow helmet rings against the plain.
  Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey,
  From his torn arm the Grecian rent away
  The reeking javelin, and rejoin'd his friends.
  His wounded brother good Polites tends;
  Around his waist his pious arms he threw,
  And from the rage of battle gently drew:
  Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car,
  Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war;
  To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore,
  And sprinkling, as he pass'd, the sands with gore.

  Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground,
  Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound.
  Bold Aphareus by great Cneas bled;
  As toward the chief he turn'd his daring head,
  He pierced his throat; the bending head, depress'd
  Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast;
  His shield reversed o'er the fallen warrior lies,
  And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.
  Antilochus, as Thoon turn'd him round,
  Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound:
  The hollow vein, that to the neck extends
  Along the chine, his eager javelin rends:
  Supine he falls, and to his social train
  Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.
  Th' exulting victor, leaping where he lay,
  From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away;
  His time observed; for closed by foes around,
  On all sides thick the peals of arms resound.
  His shield emboss'd the ringing storm sustains,
  But he impervious and untouch'd remains.
  (Great Neptune's care preserved from hostile rage
  This youth, the joy of Nestor's glorious age.)
  In arms intrepid, with the first he fought,
  Faced every foe, and every danger sought;
  His winged lance, resistless as the wind,
  Obeys each motion of the master's mind!
  Restless it flies, impatient to be free,
  And meditates the distant enemy.
  The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,
  And struck his target with the brazen spear
  Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow,
  And blunts the javelin of th' eluded foe:
  In the broad buckler half the weapon stood,
  Splinter'd on earth flew half the broken wood.
  Disarm'd, he mingled in the Trojan crew;
  But Merion's spear o'ertook him as he flew,
  Deep in the belly's rim an entrance found,
  Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound.
  Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,
  Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied,
  While death's strong pangs distend his labouring side,
  His bulk enormous on the field displays;
  His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
  The spear the conqueror from his body drew,
  And death's dim shadows swarm before his view.
  Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:
  King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade,
  And smote his temples with an arm so strong,
  The helm fell off, and roll'd amid the throng:
  There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;
  For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
  Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
  And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
  That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw;
  And this stood adverse with the bended bow:
  Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell,
  But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
  As on some ample barn's well harden'd floor,
  (The winds collected at each open door,)
  While the broad fan with force is whirl'd around,
  Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
  So from the steel that guards Atrides' heart,
  Repell'd to distance flies the bounding dart.
  Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,
  Pierced with his lance the hand that grasp'd the bow.
  And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand
  Trail'd the long lance that mark'd with blood the sand:
  But good Agenor gently from the wound
  The spear solicits, and the bandage bound;
  A sling's soft wool, snatch'd from a soldier's side,
  At once the tent and ligature supplied.

  Behold! Pisander, urged by fate's decree,
  Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
  Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:
  High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
  First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;
  The lance far distant by the winds was blown.
  Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides' shield:
  Pisander's spear fell shiver'd on the field.
  Not so discouraged, to the future blind,
  Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind;
  Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord
  Like lightning brandish'd his far beaming sword.
  His left arm high opposed the shining shield:
  His right beneath, the cover'd pole-axe held;
  (An olive's cloudy grain the handle made,
  Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;)
  This on the helm discharged a noble blow;
  The plume dropp'd nodding to the plain below,
  Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel:
  Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell;
  The crashing bones before its force gave way;
  In dust and blood the groaning hero lay:
  Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore,
  The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.
  And fierce Atrides spurn'd him as he bled,
  Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:

  "Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
  O race perfidious, who delight in war!
  Already noble deeds ye have perform'd;
  A princess raped transcends a navy storm'd:
  In such bold feats your impious might approve,
  Without th' assistance, or the fear of Jove.
  The violated rites, the ravish'd dame;
  Our heroes slaughter'd and our ships on flame,
  Crimes heap'd on crimes, shall bend your glory down,
  And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
  O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies,
  Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
  If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow,
  From whence this favour to an impious foe?
  A godless crew, abandon'd and unjust,
  Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
  The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy;
  Sleep's balmy blessing, love's endearing joy;
  The feast, the dance; whate'er mankind desire,
  Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
  But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight
  In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight."

  This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)
  The bloody armour, which his train received:
  Then sudden mix'd among the warring crew,
  And the bold son of Pylaemenes slew.
  Harpalion had through Asia travell'd far,
  Following his martial father to the war:
  Through filial love he left his native shore,
  Never, ah, never to behold it more!
  His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling
  Against the target of the Spartan king;
  Thus of his lance disarm'd, from death he flies,
  And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
  Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled,
  The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Beneath the bone the glancing point descends,
  And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:
  Sunk in his sad companions' arms he lay,
  And in short pantings sobb'd his soul away;
  (Like some vile worm extended on the ground;)
  While life's red torrent gush'd from out the wound.

  Him on his car the Paphlagonian train
  In slow procession bore from off the plain.
  The pensive father, father now no more!
  Attends the mournful pomp along the shore;
  And unavailing tears profusely shed;
  And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead.

  Paris from far the moving sight beheld,
  With pity soften'd and with fury swell'd:
  His honour'd host, a youth of matchless grace,
  And loved of all the Paphlagonian race!
  With his full strength he bent his angry bow,
  And wing'd the feather'd vengeance at the foe.
  A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named,
  For riches much, and more for virtue famed.
  Who held his seat in Corinth's stately town;
  Polydus' son, a seer of old renown.
  Oft had the father told his early doom,
  By arms abroad, or slow disease at home:
  He climb'd his vessel, prodigal of breath,
  And chose the certain glorious path to death.
  Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went;
  The soul came issuing at the narrow vent:
  His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground,
  And everlasting darkness shades him round.

  Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield,
  (Wrapp'd in the cloud and tumult of the field:)
  Wide on the left the force of Greece commands,
  And conquest hovers o'er th' Achaian bands;
  With such a tide superior virtue sway'd,
  And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid.
  But in the centre Hector fix'd remain'd,
  Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gain'd;
  There, on the margin of the hoary deep,
  (Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.
  And where low walls confine the beating tides,
  Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides;
  Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged,
  And all the thunder of the battle raged,)
  There join'd, the whole Boeotian strength remains,
  The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains,
  Locrians and Phthians, and th' Epaean force;
  But join'd, repel not Hector's fiery course.
  The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led;
  Bias and great Menestheus at their head:
  Meges the strong the Epaean bands controll'd,
  And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:
  The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might,
  And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
  This drew from Phylacus his noble line;
  Iphiclus' son: and that (Oileus) thine:
  (Young Ajax' brother, by a stolen embrace;
  He dwelt far distant from his native place,
  By his fierce step-dame from his father's reign
  Expell'd and exiled for her brother slain:)
  These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ,
  Mix'd with Boeotians, on the shores of Troy.

  Now side by side, with like unwearied care,
  Each Ajax laboured through the field of war:
  So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil,
  Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil,
  Join'd to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear,
  And trace large furrows with the shining share;
  O'er their huge limbs the foam descends in snow,
  And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow.
  A train of heroes followed through the field,
  Who bore by turns great Ajax' sevenfold shield;
  Whene'er he breathed, remissive of his might,
  Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
  No following troops his brave associate grace:
  In close engagement an unpractised race,
  The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield,
  Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;
  But skill'd from far the flying shaft to wing,
  Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,
  Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound,
  Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
  Thus in the van the Telamonian train,
  Throng'd in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain:
  Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,
  Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky,
  The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;
  Troy's scattering orders open to the shower.

  Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,
  And the gall'd Ilians to their walls retired;
  But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
  Address'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "Though great in all, thou seem'st averse to lend
  Impartial audience to a faithful friend;
  To gods and men thy matchless worth is known,
  And every art of glorious war thy own;
  But in cool thought and counsel to excel,
  How widely differs this from warring well!
  Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
  Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
  To some the powers of bloody war belong,
  To some sweet music and the charm of song;
  To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign'd
  A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
  Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
  And towns and empires for their safety bless.
  If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
  Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
  See, as thou mov'st, on dangers dangers spread,
  And war's whole fury burns around thy head.
  Behold! distress'd within yon hostile wall,
  How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
  What troops, out-number'd, scarce the war maintain!
  And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
  Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings
  Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things.
  Whether (the gods succeeding our desires)
  To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires;
  Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away,
  Contented with the conquest of the day.
  I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone,
  Pay the large debt of last revolving sun;
  Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
  On yonder decks, and yet o'erlooks the plains!"

  The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound,
  Leap'd from his chariot on the trembling ground;
  Swift as he leap'd his clanging arms resound.
  "To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,
  And here detain the scatter'd youth of Troy;
  Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,
  And hasten back to end the doubtful day."

  This said, the towering chief prepares to go,
  Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,
  And seems a moving mountain topp'd with snow.
  Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,
  And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
  To Panthus' son, at Hector's high command
  Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band:
  But round the battlements, and round the plain,
  For many a chief he look'd, but look'd in vain;
  Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,
  Nor Asius' son, nor Asius' self appear:
  For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound,
  Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;
  Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay;
  High on the wall some breathed their souls away.

  Far on the left, amid the throng he found
  (Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around)
  The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,
  Opprobrious thus, th' impatient chief reproved:

  "Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind,
  As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
  Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
  The godlike father, and th' intrepid son?
  The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;
  And great Othryoneus, so fear'd of late?
  Black fate hang's o'er thee from th' avenging gods,
  Imperial Troy from her foundations nods;
  Whelm'd in thy country's ruin shalt thou fall,
  And one devouring vengeance swallow all."

  When Paris thus: "My brother and my friend,
  Thy warm impatience makes thy tongue offend,
  In other battles I deserved thy blame,
  Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame:
  But since yon rampart by thy arms lay low,
  I scatter'd slaughter from my fatal bow.
  The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain;
  Of all those heroes, two alone remain;
  Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer,
  Each now disabled by a hostile spear.
  Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires:
  This heart and hand shall second all thy fires:
  What with this arm I can, prepare to know,
  Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.
  But 'tis not ours, with forces not our own
  To combat: strength is of the gods alone."
  These words the hero's angry mind assuage:
  Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
  Around Polydamas, distain'd with blood,
  Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood,
  Palmus, with Polypoetes the divine,
  And two bold brothers of Hippotion's line
  (Who reach'd fair Ilion, from Ascania far,
  The former day; the next engaged in war).
  As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs,
  That bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful wings,
  Wide o'er the blasted fields the tempest sweeps;
  Then, gather'd, settles on the hoary deeps;
  The afflicted deeps tumultuous mix and roar;
  The waves behind impel the waves before,
  Wide rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore:
  Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng,
  Chief urged on chief, and man drove man along.
  Far o'er the plains, in dreadful order bright,
  The brazen arms reflect a beamy light:
  Full in the blazing van great Hector shined,
  Like Mars commission'd to confound mankind.
  Before him flaming his enormous shield,
  Like the broad sun, illumined all the field;
  His nodding helm emits a streamy ray;
  His piercing eyes through all the battle stray,
  And, while beneath his targe he flash'd along,
  Shot terrors round, that wither'd e'en the strong.

  Thus stalk'd he, dreadful; death was in his look:
  Whole nations fear'd; but not an Argive shook.
  The towering Ajax, with an ample stride,
  Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied:

  "Hector! come on; thy empty threats forbear;
  'Tis not thy arm, 'tis thundering Jove we fear:
  The skill of war to us not idly given,
  Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven.
  Vain are the hopes that haughty mind imparts,
  To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and hearts.
  Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall,
  Your boasted city, and your god-built wall,
  Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground;
  And spread a long unmeasured ruin round.
  The time shall come, when, chased along the plain,
  Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain;
  Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course,
  The wings of falcons for thy flying horse;
  Shalt run, forgetful of a warrior's fame,
  While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame."

  As thus he spoke, behold, in open view,
  On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
  To Jove's glad omen all the Grecians rise,
  And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies:
  Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side;
  They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied:

  "From whence this menace, this insulting strain?
  Enormous boaster! doom'd to vaunt in vain.
  So may the gods on Hector life bestow,
  (Not that short life which mortals lead below,
  But such as those of Jove's high lineage born,
  The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)
  As this decisive day shall end the fame
  Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
  And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait
  The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:
  That giant-corse, extended on the shore,
  Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore."

  He said; and like a lion stalk'd along:
  With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,
  Sent from his following host: the Grecian train
  With answering thunders fill'd the echoing plain;
  A shout that tore heaven's concave, and, above,
  Shook the fix'd splendours of the throne of Jove.

                     [Illustration: GREEK EARRINGS.]

                             GREEK EARRINGS.





BOOK XIV.


ARGUMENT.(231)

JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.

Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the increasing
clamour of war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he meets that prince
with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the extremity of the danger.
Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by night, which Ulysses
withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, wounded as they were,
they should go forth and encourage the army with their presence, which
advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of Jupiter to the Trojans,
forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off her charms with the utmost
care, and (the more surely to enchant him) obtains the magic girdle of
Venus. She then applies herself to the god of sleep, and, with some
difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of Jupiter: this done, she goes
to mount Ida, where the god, at first sight, is ravished with her beauty,
sinks in her embraces, and is laid asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his
slumber, and succours the Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a
prodigious stone by Ajax, and carried off from the battle: several actions
succeed, till the Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the
lesser Ajax signalizes himself in a particular manner.

  But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,
  Could charm the cares of Nestor's watchful soul;
  His startled ears the increasing cries attend;
  Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:

  "What new alarm, divine Machaon, say,
  What mix'd events attend this mighty day?
  Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
  And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!
  Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care,
  Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare,
  Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;
  While I the adventures of the day explore."

  He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes' shield,
  (His valiant offspring,) hasten'd to the field;
  (That day the son his father's buckler bore;)
  Then snatch'd a lance, and issued from the door.
  Soon as the prospect open'd to his view,
  His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;
  Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight,
  The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
  As when old ocean's silent surface sleeps,
  The waves just heaving on the purple deeps:
  While yet the expected tempest hangs on high,
  Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky,
  The mass of waters will no wind obey;
  Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
  While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,
  Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage,
  To join the host, or to the general haste;
  Debating long, he fixes on the last:
  Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,
  The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms,
  The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly;
  Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.

  Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet,
  By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:
  The king of men, Ulysses the divine,
  And who to Tydeus owes his noble line.(232)
  (Their ships at distance from the battle stand,
  In lines advanced along the shelving strand:
  Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain
  At length; beside the margin of the main,
  Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor:
  Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.)
  Supported on the spears, they took their way,
  Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day.
  Nestor's approach alarm'd each Grecian breast,
  Whom thus the general of the host address'd:

  "O grace and glory of the Achaian name;
  What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
  Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfill'd,
  Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes kill'd?
  Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good,
  On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.
  Is every heart inflamed with equal rage
  Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
  And have I lived to see with mournful eyes
  In every Greek a new Achilles rise?"

  Gerenian Nestor then: "So fate has will'd;
  And all-confirming time has fate fulfill'd.
  Not he that thunders from the aerial bower,
  Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
  The wall, our late inviolable bound,
  And best defence, lies smoking on the ground:
  Even to the ships their conquering arms extend,
  And groans of slaughter'd Greeks to heaven ascend.
  On speedy measures then employ your thought
  In such distress! if counsel profit aught:
  Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls incite,
  These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight."

  To him the monarch: "That our army bends,
  That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends,
  And that the rampart, late our surest trust
  And best defence, lies smoking in the dust;
  All this from Jove's afflictive hand we bear,
  Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here.
  Past are the days when happier Greece was blest,
  And all his favour, all his aid confess'd;
  Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties,
  And lifts the Trojan glory to the skies.
  Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain,
  And launch what ships lie nearest to the main;
  Leave these at anchor, till the coming night:
  Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight,
  Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight.
  Better from evils, well foreseen, to run,
  Than perish in the danger we may shun."

  Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,
  While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes:
  "What shameful words (unkingly as thou art)
  Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart?
  Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner powers,
  And thou the shame of any host but ours!
  A host, by Jove endued with martial might,
  And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight:
  Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage,
  Employ'd our youth, and yet employs our age.
  And wilt thou thus desert the Trojan plain?
  And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?
  In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear,
  Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
  Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares
  To think such meanness, or the thought declares?
  And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway
  The banded legions of all Greece obey?
  Is this a general's voice that calls to flight,
  While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
  What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies
  Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.
  No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,
  Themselves abandon'd) shall the fight pursue;
  But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;
  And owe destruction to a prince like thee."

  "Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)
  Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
  Unwilling as I am to lose the host,
  I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast;
  Glad I submit, whoe'er, or young, or old,
  Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold."

  Tydides cut him short, and thus began:
  "Such counsel if you seek, behold the man
  Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
  Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
  A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
  May speak to councils and assembled kings.
  Hear then in me the great OEnides' son,
  Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)
  Lies whelm'd in ruins of the Theban wall;
  Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
  With three bold sons was generous Prothous bless'd,
  Who Pleuron's walls and Calydon possess'd;
  Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpass'd
  The rest in courage) OEneus was the last.
  From him, my sire. From Calydon expell'd,
  He pass'd to Argos, and in exile dwell'd;
  The monarch's daughter there (so Jove ordain'd)
  He won, and flourish'd where Adrastus reign'd;
  There, rich in fortune's gifts, his acres till'd,
  Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield,
  And numerous flocks that whiten'd all the field.
  Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
  Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
  Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire,
  Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
  Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress'd,
  Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
  Advance the glory which he cannot share,
  Though not partaker, witness of the war.
  But lest new wounds on wounds o'erpower us quite,
  Beyond the missile javelin's sounding flight,
  Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far,
  Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war."

  He added not: the listening kings obey,
  Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
  The god of ocean (to inflame their rage)
  Appears a warrior furrowed o'er with age;
  Press'd in his own, the general's hand he took,
  And thus the venerable hero spoke:

  "Atrides! lo! with what disdainful eye
  Achilles sees his country's forces fly;
  Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide,
  Who glories in unutterable pride.
  So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
  The wretch relentless, and o'erwhelm with shame!
  But Heaven forsakes not thee: o'er yonder sands
  Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
  Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown'd,
  Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
  Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
  To hide their ignominious heads in Troy."

  He spoke, then rush'd amid the warrior crew,
  And sent his voice before him as he flew,
  Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
  When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
  Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
  Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
  Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight,
  And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.

  Meantime Saturnia from Olympus' brow,
  High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below;
  With joy the glorious conflict she survey'd,
  Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid.
  But placed aloft, on Ida's shady height
  She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight.
  Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try,
  What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye?
  At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove
  The old, yet still successful, cheat of love;
  Against his wisdom to oppose her charms,
  And lull the lord of thunders in her arms.

  Swift to her bright apartment she repairs,
  Sacred to dress and beauty's pleasing cares:
  With skill divine had Vulcan form'd the bower,
  Safe from access of each intruding power.
  Touch'd with her secret key, the doors unfold:
  Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of gold.
  Here first she bathes; and round her body pours
  Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers:
  The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey
  Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way:
  Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets
  The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
  Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride
  Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied;
  Part on her head in shining ringlets roll'd,
  Part o'er her shoulders waved like melted gold.
  Around her next a heavenly mantle flow'd,
  That rich with Pallas' labour'd colours glow'd:
  Large clasps of gold the foldings gather'd round,
  A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
  Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,
  Each gem illumined with a triple star.
  Then o'er her head she cast a veil more white
  Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
  Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
  Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace,
  Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves,
  And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.

  "How long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
  Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
  Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia's joy,
  And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?"

  "Let heaven's dread empress (Cytheraea said)
  Speak her request, and deem her will obey'd."

  "Then grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms,
  That power, which mortals and immortals warms,
  That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,
  And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!

  "For lo! I haste to those remote abodes,
  Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)
  Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep,
  On the last limits of the land and deep.
  In their kind arms my tender years were past;
  What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
  Of upper heaven to Jove resign'd the reign,
  Whelm'd under the huge mass of earth and main.
  For strife, I hear, has made the union cease,
  Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
  What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,
  If I compose those fatal feuds again;
  Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,
  And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!"

  She said. With awe divine, the queen of love
  Obey'd the sister and the wife of Jove;
  And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,(233)
  With various skill and high embroidery graced.
  In this was every art, and every charm,
  To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
  Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
  The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
  Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs,
  Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
  This on her hand the Cyprian Goddess laid:
  "Take this, and with it all thy wish;" she said.
  With smiles she took the charm; and smiling press'd
  The powerful cestus to her snowy breast.

  Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew;
  Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
  O'er high Pieria thence her course she bore,
  O'er fair Emathia's ever-pleasing shore,
  O'er Hemus' hills with snows eternal crown'd;
  Nor once her flying foot approach'd the ground.
  Then taking wing from Athos' lofty steep,
  She speeds to Lemnos o'er the rolling deep,
  And seeks the cave of Death's half-brother, Sleep.(234)

  "Sweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began)
  Who spread'st thy empire o'er each god and man;
  If e'er obsequious to thy Juno's will,
  O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.
  Shed thy soft dews on Jove's immortal eyes,
  While sunk in love's entrancing joys he lies.
  A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine
  With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;
  The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease,
  When wine and feasts thy golden humours please."

  "Imperial dame (the balmy power replies),
  Great Saturn's heir, and empress of the skies!
  O'er other gods I spread my easy chain;
  The sire of all, old Ocean, owns my reign.
  And his hush'd waves lie silent on the main.
  But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep
  Jove's awful temples in the dew of sleep?
  Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command,
  On those eternal lids I laid my hand;
  What time, deserting Ilion's wasted plain,
  His conquering son, Alcides, plough'd the main.
  When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar,
  And drive the hero to the Coan shore:
  Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodes
  With rising wrath, and tumbled gods on gods;
  Me chief he sought, and from the realms on high
  Had hurl'd indignant to the nether sky,
  But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid,
  (The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings display'd;
  Impower'd the wrath of gods and men to tame,
  Even Jove revered the venerable dame."

  "Vain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies,
  And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);
  Think'st thou that Troy has Jove's high favour won,
  Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son?
  Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,
  Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize;
  For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."(235)

  "Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
  That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
  Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
  And stretch the other o'er the sacred main:
  Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
  To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
  That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

  The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
  Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
  And those who rule the inviolable floods,
  Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.

        [Illustration: SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.]

                SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.


  Then swift as wind, o'er Lemnos' smoky isle
  They wing their way, and Imbrus' sea-beat soil;
  Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
  And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
  (Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
  Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
  Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
  Hush'd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
  There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
  To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
  Dark in embowering shade, conceal'd from sight,
  Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
  (Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
  But call'd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

  To Ida's top successful Juno flies;
  Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
  The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire,
  Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;
  Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms,
  Mix'd with her soul, and melted in her arms:
  Fix'd on her eyes he fed his eager look,
  Then press'd her hand, and thus with transport spoke:

  "Why comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,
  And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?"

  Then she--"I haste to those remote abodes
  Where the great parents of the deathless gods,
  The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys, reign,
  On the last limits of the land and main.
  I visit these, to whose indulgent cares
  I owe the nursing of my tender years:
  For strife, I hear, has made that union cease
  Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
  The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey
  O'er earth and seas, and through the aerial way,
  Wait under Ide: of thy superior power
  To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower;
  Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells
  Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells."

  "For that (said Jove) suffice another day!
  But eager love denies the least delay.
  Let softer cares the present hour employ,
  And be these moments sacred all to joy.
  Ne'er did my soul so strong a passion prove,
  Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love:
  Not when I press'd Ixion's matchless dame,
  Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame:
  Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold
  Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
  Not thus I burn'd for either Theban dame:
  (Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:)
  Nor Phoenix' daughter, beautiful and young,
  Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.(236)
  Not thus I burn'd for fair Latona's face,
  Nor comelier Ceres' more majestic grace.
  Not thus even for thyself I felt desire,
  As now my veins receive the pleasing fire."

  He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes
  Glows with celestial red, and thus replies:
  "Is this a scene for love? On Ida's height,
  Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
  Our joys profaned by each familiar eye;
  The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky:
  How shall I e'er review the blest abodes,
  Or mix among the senate of the gods?
  Shall I not think, that, with disorder'd charms,
  All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?
  With skill divine has Vulcan form'd thy bower,
  Sacred to love and to the genial hour;
  If such thy will, to that recess retire,
  In secret there indulge thy soft desire."

  She ceased; and, smiling with superior love,
  Thus answer'd mild the cloud-compelling Jove:
  "Nor god nor mortal shall our joys behold,
  Shaded with clouds, and circumfused in gold;
  Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his rays,
  And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys."

  Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view,
  His eager arms around the goddess threw.
  Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours
  Unbidden herbs and voluntary flowers:
  Thick new-born violets a soft carpet spread,
  And clustering lotos swell'd the rising bed,
  And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,(237)
  And flamy crocus made the mountain glow
  There golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair,
  Steep'd in soft joys and circumfused with air;
  Celestial dews, descending o'er the ground,
  Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round:
  At length, with love and sleep's soft power oppress'd,
  The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest.

  Now to the navy borne on silent wings,
  To Neptune's ear soft Sleep his message brings;
  Beside him sudden, unperceived, he stood,
  And thus with gentle words address'd the god:

  "Now, Neptune! now, the important hour employ,
  To check a while the haughty hopes of Troy:
  While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shed
  The golden vision round his sacred head;
  For Juno's love, and Somnus' pleasing ties,
  Have closed those awful and eternal eyes."
  Thus having said, the power of slumber flew,
  On human lids to drop the balmy dew.
  Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,
  And towering in the foremost ranks of war,
  Indignant thus--"Oh once of martial fame!
  O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name!
  This half-recover'd day shall Troy obtain?
  Shall Hector thunder at your ships again?
  Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
  One hero's loss too tamely you deplore,
  Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
  Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms,
  Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:
  His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield,
  Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;
  Let to the weak the lighter arms belong,
  The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
  Thus arm'd, not Hector shall our presence stay;
  Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way."

                      [Illustration: GREEK SHIELD.]

                              GREEK SHIELD.


  The troops assent; their martial arms they change:
  The busy chiefs their banded legions range.
  The kings, though wounded, and oppress'd with pain,
  With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
  The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,
  The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
  Thus sheath'd in shining brass, in bright array
  The legions march, and Neptune leads the way:
  His brandish'd falchion flames before their eyes,
  Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies.
  Clad in his might, the earth-shaking power appears;
  Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears.

  Troy's great defender stands alone unawed,
  Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god:
  And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear:
  The sea's stern ruler there, and Hector here.
  The roaring main, at her great master's call,
  Rose in huge ranks, and form'd a watery wall
  Around the ships: seas hanging o'er the shores,
  Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
  Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound,
  When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;
  Less loud the winds that from the Colian hall
  Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;
  Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,
  Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour;
  With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,
  And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
  The first bold javelin, urged by Hector's force,
  Direct at Ajax' bosom winged its course;
  But there no pass the crossing belts afford,
  (One braced his shield, and one sustain'd his sword.)
  Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
  And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:
  But 'scaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand
  A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,
  (Where heaps laid loose beneath the warrior's feet,
  Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,)
  Toss'd round and round, the missive marble flings;
  On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings,
  Full on his breast and throat with force descends;
  Nor deaden'd there its giddy fury spends,
  But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
  Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground.
  As when the bolt, red-hissing from above,
  Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,
  The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies,
  Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;
  Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand,
  And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
  So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore;
  His slacken'd hand deserts the lance it bore;
  His following shield the fallen chief o'erspread;
  Beneath his helmet dropp'd his fainting head;
  His load of armour, sinking to the ground,
  Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
  Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;
  Greece sees, in hope, Troy's great defender slain:
  All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly,
  And thicker javelins intercept the sky.
  In vain an iron tempest hisses round;
  He lies protected, and without a wound.(238)
  Polydamas, Agenor the divine,
  The pious warrior of Anchises' line,
  And each bold leader of the Lycian band,
  With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand,
  His mournful followers, with assistant care,
  The groaning hero to his chariot bear;
  His foaming coursers, swifter than the wind,
  Speed to the town, and leave the war behind.

  When now they touch'd the mead's enamell'd side,
  Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide,
  With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round,
  Placed on the margin of the flowery ground.
  Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore;
  Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore;
  By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies,
  And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes.

  Soon as the Greeks the chief's retreat beheld,
  With double fury each invades the field.
  Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped,
  Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled;
  (Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore
  Amidst her flocks on Satnio's silver shore;)
  Struck through the belly's rim, the warrior lies
  Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.
  An arduous battle rose around the dead;
  By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.

  Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near,
  And at Prothoenor shook the trembling spear;
  The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust,
  He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
  "Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,
  And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield:
  From this unerring hand there flies no dart
  But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
  Propp'd on that spear to which thou owest thy fall,
  Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto's dreary hall."

  He said, and sorrow touch'd each Argive breast:
  The soul of Ajax burn'd above the rest.
  As by his side the groaning warrior fell,
  At the fierce foe he launch'd his piercing steel;
  The foe, reclining, shunn'd the flying death;
  But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath:
  Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,
  The wings of death o'ertook thee on the dart;
  Swift to perform heaven's fatal will, it fled
  Full on the juncture of the neck and head,
  And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:
  The dropping head first tumbled on the plain.
  So just the stroke, that yet the body stood
  Erect, then roll'd along the sands in blood.

  "Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
  (The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)
  Say, is this chief extended on the plain
  A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
  Mark well his port! his figure and his face
  Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;
  Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known,
  Antenor's brother, or perhaps his son."

  He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew
  The bleeding youth: Troy sadden'd at the view.
  But furious Acamas avenged his cause;
  As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws,
  He pierced his heart--"Such fate attends you all,
  Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
  Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share
  The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.
  Behold your Promachus deprived of breath,
  A victim owed to my brave brother's death.
  Not unappeased he enters Pluto's gate,
  Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate."

  Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host,
  But touch'd the breast of bold Peneleus most;
  At the proud boaster he directs his course;
  The boaster flies, and shuns superior force.
  But young Ilioneus received the spear;
  Ilioneus, his father's only care:
  (Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train
  Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:)
  Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall,
  And from the fibres scoop'd the rooted ball,
  Drove through the neck, and hurl'd him to the plain;
  He lifts his miserable arms in vain!
  Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread,
  And from the spouting shoulders struck his head;
  To earth at once the head and helmet fly;
  The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye,
  The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook
  The gory visage, thus insulting spoke:

  "Trojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
  Haste, to his father let the tale be told:
  Let his high roofs resound with frantic woe,
  Such as the house of Promachus must know;
  Let doleful tidings greet his mother's ear,
  Such as to Promachus' sad spouse we bear,
  When we victorious shall to Greece return,
  And the pale matron in our triumphs mourn."

  Dreadful he spoke, then toss'd the head on high;
  The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly:
  Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall,
  And dread the ruin that impends on all.

  Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,
  Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine!
  O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield,
  What chief, what hero first embrued the field?
  Of all the Grecians what immortal name,
  And whose bless'd trophies, will ye raise to fame?

  Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain
  Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train.
  Phalces and Mermer, Nestor's son o'erthrew,
  Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
  Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,
  By Teucer's arrows mingled with the dead,
  Pierced in the flank by Menelaus' steel,
  His people's pastor, Hyperenor fell;
  Eternal darkness wrapp'd the warrior round,
  And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound.
  But stretch'd in heaps before Oileus' son,
  Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;
  Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race
  Skill'd in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.

                         [Illustration: BACCHUS.]

                                 BACCHUS.





BOOK XV.


ARGUMENT.

THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.

Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector in a
swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly incensed at the
artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; she is then sent to
Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of the gods, attempts,
with extraordinary address, to incense them against Jupiter; in particular
she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he is ready to take arms, but
is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris
commands Neptune to leave the battle, to which, after much reluctance and
passion, he consents. Apollo reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him
back to the battle, marches before him with his aegis, and turns the
fortune of the fight. He breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the
Trojans rush in, and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are,
as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.

  Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
  Then stopp'd and panted, where the chariots lie
  Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
  Meanwhile, awaken'd from his dream of love,
  On Ida's summit sat imperial Jove:
  Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
  There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
  These proud in arms, those scatter'd o'er the plain
  And, 'midst the war, the monarch of the main.
  Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
  (His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
  Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
  His senses wandering to the verge of death.
  The god beheld him with a pitying look,
  And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:

  "O thou, still adverse to the eternal will,
  For ever studious in promoting ill!
  Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
  And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
  Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand
  Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
  Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix'd on high,
  From the vast concave of the spangled sky,
  I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,
  And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
  Headlong I hurl'd them from the Olympian hall,
  Stunn'd in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.
  For godlike Hercules these deeds were done,
  Nor seem'd the vengeance worthy such a son:
  When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas toss'd
  The shipwreck'd hero on the Coan coast,
  Him through a thousand forms of death I bore,
  And sent to Argos, and his native shore.
  Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,
  Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head;
  Lest arts and blandishments successless prove,
  Thy soft deceits, and well-dissembled love."

  The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mourn'd,
  And, trembling, these submissive words return'd:

  "By every oath that powers immortal ties,
  The foodful earth and all-infolding skies;
  By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that flow
  Through the drear realms of gliding ghosts below;
  By the dread honours of thy sacred head,
  And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed!
  Not by my arts the ruler of the main
  Steeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain:
  By his own ardour, his own pity sway'd,
  To help his Greeks, he fought and disobey'd:
  Else had thy Juno better counsels given,
  And taught submission to the sire of heaven."

  "Think'st thou with me? fair empress of the skies!
  (The immortal father with a smile replies;)
  Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey,
  Nor dare to act but when we point the way.
  If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will
  To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill;
  Our high decree let various Iris know,
  And call the god that bears the silver bow.
  Let her descend, and from the embattled plain
  Command the sea-god to his watery reign:
  While Phoebus hastes great Hector to prepare
  To rise afresh, and once more wake the war:
  His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath,
  And calls his senses from the verge of death.
  Greece chased by Troy, even to Achilles' fleet,
  Shall fall by thousands at the hero's feet.
  He, not untouch'd with pity, to the plain
  Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
  What youths he slaughters under Ilion's walls!
  Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls!
  Vanquish'd at last by Hector's lance he lies.
  Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
  And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
  From that great hour the war's whole fortune turns,
  Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
  Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage,
  Nor one of all the heavenly host engage
  In aid of Greece. The promise of a god
  I gave, and seal'd it with the almighty nod,
  Achilles' glory to the stars to raise;
  Such was our word, and fate the word obeys."

  The trembling queen (the almighty order given)
  Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
  As some wayfaring man, who wanders o'er
  In thought a length of lands he trod before,
  Sends forth his active mind from place to place,
  Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:
  So swift flew Juno to the bless'd abodes,
  If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
  There sat the powers in awful synod placed;
  They bow'd, and made obeisance as she pass'd
  Through all the brazen dome: with goblets crown'd(239)
  They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
  Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,
  And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?

  To whom the white-arm'd goddess thus replies:
  "Enough thou know'st the tyrant of the skies,
  Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,
  Unmoved his mind, and unrestrain'd his will.
  Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call;
  Bid the crown'd nectar circle round the hall:
  But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome
  Such stern decrees, such threaten'd woes to come,
  As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise,
  And damp the eternal banquets of the skies."

  The goddess said, and sullen took her place;
  Black horror sadden'd each celestial face.
  To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
  Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy express'd;
  While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,
  Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
  Thus she proceeds--"Attend, ye powers above!
  But know, 'tis madness to contest with Jove:
  Supreme he sits; and sees, in pride of sway.
  Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey:
  Fierce in the majesty of power controls;
  Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.
  Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey:
  And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way.
  Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,
  But dare not murmur, dare not vent a sigh;
  Thy own loved boasted offspring lies o'erthrown,
  If that loved boasted offspring be thy own."

  Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughter'd son,
  Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun:
  "Thus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
  Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:
  Descending first to yon forbidden plain,
  The god of battles dares avenge the slain;
  Dares, though the thunder bursting o'er my head
  Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead."

  With that he gives command to Fear and Flight
  To join his rapid coursers for the fight:
  Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;
  Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies.
  And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,
  Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven;
  But Pallas, springing through the bright abode,
  Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
  Struck for the immortal race with timely fear,
  From frantic Mars she snatch'd the shield and spear;
  Then the huge helmet lifting from his head,
  Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

  "By what wild passion, furious! art thou toss'd?
  Striv'st thou with Jove? thou art already lost.
  Shall not the Thunderer's dread command restrain,
  And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
  Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,
  And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven?
  Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage,
  The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;
  Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate
  And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
  Cease then thy offspring's death unjust to call;
  Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
  Why should heaven's law with foolish man comply
  Exempted from the race ordain'd to die?"

  This menace fix'd the warrior to his throne;
  Sullen he sat, and curb'd the rising groan.
  Then Juno call'd (Jove's orders to obey)
  The winged Iris, and the god of day.
  "Go wait the Thunderer's will (Saturnia cried)
  On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide:
  There in the father's awful presence stand,
  Receive, and execute his dread command."

  She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day,
  And various Iris, wing their airy way.
  Swift as the wind, to Ida's hills they came,
  (Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game)
  There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls
  The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.
  Veil'd in a mist of fragrance him they found,
  With clouds of gold and purple circled round.
  Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care,
  And prompt obedience to the queen of air;
  Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow)
  Commands the goddess of the showery bow:

  "Iris! descend, and what we here ordain,
  Report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
  Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair,
  Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air.
  If he refuse, then let him timely weigh
  Our elder birthright, and superior sway.
  How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms,
  If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
  Strives he with me, by whom his power was given,
  And is there equal to the lord of heaven?"

  The all-mighty spoke; the goddess wing'd her flight
  To sacred Ilion from the Idaean height.
  Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows,
  Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows;
  So from the clouds descending Iris falls,
  And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls:

  "Attend the mandate of the sire above!
  In me behold the messenger of Jove:
  He bids thee from forbidden wars repair
  To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air.
  This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh
  His elder birthright, and superior sway.
  How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms
  If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
  Striv'st thou with him by whom all power is given?
  And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?"

  "What means the haughty sovereign of the skies?
  (The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;)
  Rule as he will his portion'd realms on high;
  No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.
  Three brother deities from Saturn came,
  And ancient Rhea, earth's immortal dame:
  Assign'd by lot, our triple rule we know;
  Infernal Pluto sways the shades below;
  O'er the wide clouds, and o'er the starry plain,
  Ethereal Jove extends his high domain;
  My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,
  And hush the roarings of the sacred deep;
  Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:
  What claim has here the tyrant of the sky?
  Far in the distant clouds let him control,
  And awe the younger brothers of the pole;
  There to his children his commands be given,
  The trembling, servile, second race of heaven."

  "And must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
  Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
  Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent;
  A noble mind disdains not to repent.
  To elder brothers guardian fiends are given,
  To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven."

  "Great is the profit (thus the god rejoin'd)
  When ministers are blest with prudent mind:
  Warn'd by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,
  And quit, though angry, the contended field:
  Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,
  The same our honours, and our birth the same.
  If yet, forgetful of his promise given
  To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven,
  To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,
  He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race;
  Give him to know, unless the Grecian train
  Lay yon proud structures level with the plain,
  Howe'er the offence by other gods be pass'd,
  The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last."

  Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode,
  And plunged into the bosom of the flood.
  The lord of thunders, from his lofty height
  Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:

  "Behold! the god whose liquid arms are hurl'd
  Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,
  Desists at length his rebel-war to wage,
  Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our rage;
  Else had my wrath, heaven's thrones all shaking round,
  Burn'd to the bottom of his seas profound;
  And all the gods that round old Saturn dwell
  Had heard the thunders to the deeps of hell.
  Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared;
  Even power immense had found such battle hard.
  Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm,
  Shake my broad aegis on thy active arm,
  Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care,
  Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war:
  Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train
  Fly to their ships and Hellespont again:
  Then Greece shall breathe from toils." The godhead said;
  His will divine the son of Jove obey'd.
  Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies,
  That drives a turtle through the liquid skies,
  As Phoebus, shooting from the Idaean brow,
  Glides down the mountain to the plain below.
  There Hector seated by the stream he sees,
  His sense returning with the coming breeze;
  Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise;
  Again his loved companions meet his eyes;
  Jove thinking of his pains, they pass'd away,
  To whom the god who gives the golden day:

  "Why sits great Hector from the field so far?
  What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?"

  The fainting hero, as the vision bright
  Stood shining o'er him, half unseal'd his sight:

  "What blest immortal, with commanding breath,
  Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
  Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
  Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
  The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
  Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
  Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
  And hell's black horrors swim before my eye."

  To him Apollo: "Be no more dismay'd;
  See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
  Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ,
  Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
  Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
  And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
  Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
  And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea."

  Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
  And breathed immortal ardour from above.
  As when the pamper'd steed, with reins unbound,
  Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
  With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
  To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
  His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
  He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
  Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
  Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
  As when the force of men and dogs combined
  Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
  Far from the hunter's rage secure they lie
  Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
  When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
  They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
  So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
  And mark'd their progress through the ranks in blood,
  Soon as they see the furious chief appear,
  Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.

  Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course,
  Thoas, the bravest of the Ctolian force;
  Skill'd to direct the javelin's distant flight,
  And bold to combat in the standing fight,
  Not more in councils famed for solid sense,
  Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.
  "Gods! what portent (he cried) these eyes invades?
  Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian shades!
  We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax kill'd:
  What god restores him to the frighted field;
  And not content that half of Greece lie slain,
  Pours new destruction on her sons again?
  He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will;
  Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
  Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand:
  The Greeks' main body to the fleet command;
  But let the few whom brisker spirits warm,
  Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.
  Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear,
  Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear."

  The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey,
  Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.

  Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command,
  The valiant leader of the Cretan band;
  And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite,
  Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight.
  Behind, unnumber'd multitudes attend,
  To flank the navy, and the shores defend.
  Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear,
  And Hector first came towering to the war.
  Phoebus himself the rushing battle led;
  A veil of clouds involved his radiant head:
  High held before him, Jove's enormous shield
  Portentous shone, and shaded all the field;
  Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consign'd,
  To scatter hosts and terrify mankind,
  The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise
  From different parts, and mingle in the skies.
  Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung,
  And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung;
  These drink the life of generous warriors slain:
  Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain.
  As long as Phoebus bore unmoved the shield,
  Sat doubtful conquest hovering o'er the field;
  But when aloft he shakes it in the skies,
  Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes,
  Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast,
  Their force is humbled, and their fear confess'd.
  So flies a herd of oxen, scatter'd wide,
  No swain to guard them, and no day to guide,
  When two fell lions from the mountain come,
  And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.
  Impending Phoebus pours around them fear,
  And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.
  Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads,
  First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds;
  One to the bold Boeotians ever dear,
  And one Menestheus' friend and famed compeer.
  Medon and Iasus, Cneas sped;
  This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led;
  But hapless Medon from Oileus came;
  Him Ajax honour'd with a brother's name,
  Though born of lawless love: from home expell'd,
  A banish'd man, in Phylace he dwell'd,
  Press'd by the vengeance of an angry wife;
  Troy ends at last his labours and his life.
  Mecystes next Polydamas o'erthrew;
  And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew.
  By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
  Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
  Polites' arm laid Echius on the plain;
  Stretch'd on one heap, the victors spoil the slain.
  The Greeks dismay'd, confused, disperse or fall,
  Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.
  While these fly trembling, others pant for breath,
  And o'er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
  On rush'd bold Hector, gloomy as the night;
  Forbids to plunder, animates the fight,
  Points to the fleet: "For, by the gods! who flies,(240)
  Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies;
  No weeping sister his cold eye shall close,
  No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose.
  Who stops to plunder at this signal hour,
  The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour."
  Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds;
  The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds;
  The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore;
  The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!
  Apollo, planted at the trench's bound,
  Push'd at the bank: down sank the enormous mound:
  Roll'd in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;
  A sudden road! a long and ample way.
  O'er the dread fosse (a late impervious space)
  Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
  The wondering crowds the downward level trod;
  Before them flamed the shield, and march'd the god.
  Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
  And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
  Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
  And draws imagined houses in the sands;
  The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
  Sweeps the slight works and fashion'd domes away:
  Thus vanish'd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
  The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

  The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
  Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer:
  Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;
  And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
  Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,
  And weeps his country with a father's eyes.

  "O Jove! if ever, on his native shore,
  One Greek enrich'd thy shrine with offer'd gore;
  If e'er, in hope our country to behold,
  We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;
  If e'er thou sign'st our wishes with thy nod:
  Perform the promise of a gracious god!
  This day preserve our navies from the flame,
  And save the relics of the Grecian name."

  Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent,
  And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
  Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign,
  And catch'd new fury at the voice divine.
  As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies,
  The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,
  Above the sides of some tall ship ascend,
  Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend:
  Thus loudly roaring, and o'erpowering all,
  Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall;
  Legions on legions from each side arise:
  Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
  Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,
  These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw.

  While thus the thunder of the battle raged,
  And labouring armies round the works engaged,
  Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend
  The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
  He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind,
  And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
  But when he saw, ascending up the fleet,
  Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat,
  With bitter groans his sorrows he express'd,
  He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast.
  "Though yet thy state require redress (he cries)
  Depart I must: what horrors strike my eyes!
  Charged with Achilles' high command I go,
  A mournful witness of this scene of woe;
  I haste to urge him by his country's care
  To rise in arms, and shine again in war.
  Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend;
  The voice is powerful of a faithful friend."

  He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind
  Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind.
  The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain,
  But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain:
  Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array,
  Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way.
  As when a shipwright, with Palladian art,
  Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part;
  With equal hand he guides his whole design,
  By the just rule, and the directing line:
  The martial leaders, with like skill and care,
  Preserved their line, and equal kept the war.
  Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried,
  And every ship sustained an equal tide.
  At one proud bark, high-towering o'er the fleet,
  Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet;
  For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend,
  Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend:
  One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod;
  That fix'd as fate, this acted by a god.
  The son of Clytius in his daring hand,
  The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand;
  But, pierced by Telamon's huge lance, expires:
  Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguish'd fires.
  Great Hector view'd him with a sad survey,
  As stretch'd in dust before the stern he lay.
  "Oh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian race!
  Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space:
  Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies;
  Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!"

  This said, his eager javelin sought the foe:
  But Ajax shunn'd the meditated blow.
  Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown;
  It stretch'd in dust unhappy Lycophron:
  An exile long, sustain'd at Ajax' board,
  A faithful servant to a foreign lord;
  In peace, and war, for ever at his side,
  Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.
  From the high poop he tumbles on the sand,
  And lies a lifeless load along the land.
  With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight,
  And thus inflames his brother to the fight:

  "Teucer, behold! extended on the shore
  Our friend, our loved companion! now no more!
  Dear as a parent, with a parent's care
  To fight our wars he left his native air.
  This death deplored, to Hector's rage we owe;
  Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
  Where are those darts on which the fates attend?
  And where the bow which Phoebus taught to bend?"

  Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid,
  Before the chief his ample bow display'd;
  The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung:
  Then hiss'd his arrow, and the bowstring sung.
  Clytus, Pisenor's son, renown'd in fame,
  (To thee, Polydamas! an honour'd name)
  Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains
  The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.
  As all on glory ran his ardent mind,
  The pointed death arrests him from behind:
  Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies;
  In youth's first bloom reluctantly he dies.
  Hurl'd from the lofty seat, at distance far,
  The headlong coursers spurn his empty car;
  Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrain'd,
  And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand;
  Then, fired to vengeance, rush'd amidst the foe:
  Rage edged his sword, and strengthen'd every blow.

  Once more bold Teucer, in his country's cause,
  At Hector's breast a chosen arrow draws:
  And had the weapon found the destined way,
  Thy fall, great Trojan! had renown'd that day.
  But Hector was not doom'd to perish then:
  The all-wise disposer of the fates of men
  (Imperial Jove) his present death withstands;
  Nor was such glory due to Teucer's hands.
  At its full stretch as the tough string he drew,
  Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two;
  Down dropp'd the bow: the shaft with brazen head
  Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.
  The astonish'd archer to great Ajax cries;
  "Some god prevents our destined enterprise:
  Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe,
  Has, from my arm unfailing, struck the bow,
  And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art,
  Strong to impel the flight of many a dart."

  "Since heaven commands it (Ajax made reply)
  Dismiss the bow, and lay thy arrows by:
  Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield,
  And quit the quiver for the ponderous shield.
  In the first ranks indulge thy thirst of fame,
  Thy brave example shall the rest inflame.
  Fierce as they are, by long successes vain;
  To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain,
  Asks toil, and sweat, and blood: their utmost might
  Shall find its match--No more: 'tis ours to fight."

  Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside;
  The fourfold buckler o'er his shoulder tied;
  On his brave head a crested helm he placed,
  With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
  A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,
  The warrior wields; and his great brother joins.

  This Hector saw, and thus express'd his joy:
  "Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
  Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame,
  And spread your glory with the navy's flame.
  Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now,
  From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:
  Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine,
  When happy nations bear the marks divine!
  How easy then, to see the sinking state
  Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
  Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours:
  Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
  Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;
  And for our country, 'tis a bliss to die.
  The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,
  Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free;
  Entails a debt on all the grateful state;
  His own brave friends shall glory in his fate;
  His wife live honour'd, all his race succeed,
  And late posterity enjoy the deed!"

  This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:
  The godlike Ajax next his Greeks address'd:

  "How long, ye warriors of the Argive race,
  (To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)
  How long on these cursed confines will ye lie,
  Yet undetermined, or to live or die?
  What hopes remain, what methods to retire,
  If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?
  Make how the flames approach, how near they fall,
  How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
  Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites,
  It calls to death, and all the rage of fights.
  'Tis now no time for wisdom or debates;
  To your own hands are trusted all your fates;
  And better far in one decisive strife,
  One day should end our labour or our life,
  Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands,
  Still press'd, and press'd by such inglorious hands."

  The listening Grecians feel their leader's flame,
  And every kindling bosom pants for fame.
  Then mutual slaughters spread on either side;
  By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
  There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
  Chief of the foot, of old Antenor's race.
  Polydamas laid Otus on the sand,
  The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
  His lance bold Meges at the victor threw;
  The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;
  (That valued life, O Phoebus! was thy care)
  But Croesmus' bosom took the flying spear:
  His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore;
  His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
  Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on,
  Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,
  And famed for prowess in a well-fought field,
  He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:
  But Meges, Phyleus' ample breastplate wore,
  (Well-known in fight on Selle's winding shore;
  For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,
  Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale)
  Which oft, in cities storm'd, and battles won,
  Had saved the father, and now saves the son.
  Full at the Trojan's head he urged his lance,
  Where the high plumes above the helmet dance,
  New ting'd with Tyrian dye: in dust below,
  Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.
  Meantime their fight the Spartan king survey'd,
  And stood by Meges' side a sudden aid.
  Through Dolops' shoulder urged his forceful dart,
  Which held its passage through the panting heart,
  And issued at his breast. With thundering sound
  The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
  In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:
  But Hector's voice excites his kindred train;
  The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
  Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
  He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross'd the main)
  Fed his large oxen on Percote's plain;
  But when oppress'd, his country claim'd his care,
  Return'd to Ilion, and excell'd in war;
  For this, in Priam's court, he held his place,
  Beloved no less than Priam's royal race.
  Him Hector singled, as his troops he led,
  And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.

  "Lo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;
  And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
  O'ermatch'd he falls; to two at once a prey,
  And lo! they bear the bloody arms away!
  Come on--a distant war no longer wage,
  But hand to hand thy country's foes engage:
  Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;
  Or Ilion from her towery height descend,
  Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all
  In one sad sepulchre, one common fall."

  Hector (this said) rush'd forward on the foes:
  With equal ardour Melanippus glows:
  Then Ajax thus--"O Greeks! respect your fame,
  Respect yourselves, and learn an honest shame:
  Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire,
  And catch from breast to breast the noble fire,
  On valour's side the odds of combat lie;
  The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
  The wretch that trembles in the field of fame,
  Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame."

  His generous sense he not in vain imparts;
  It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts:
  They join, they throng, they thicken at his call,
  And flank the navy with a brazen wall;
  Shields touching shields, in order blaze above,
  And stop the Trojans, though impell'd by Jove.
  The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.
  Warms the bold son of Nestor in his cause.
  "Is there (he said) in arms a youth like you,
  So strong to fight, so active to pursue?
  Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?
  Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed."

  He said; and backward to the lines retired;
  Forth rush'd the youth with martial fury fired,
  Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw,
  And round the black battalions cast his view.
  The troops of Troy recede with sudden fear,
  While the swift javelin hiss'd along in air.
  Advancing Melanippus met the dart
  With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart:
  Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound,
  And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
  The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize:
  Thus on a roe the well-breath'd beagle flies,
  And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart
  The distant hunter sent into his heart.
  Observing Hector to the rescue flew;
  Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew.
  So when a savage, ranging o'er the plain,
  Has torn the shepherd's dog, or shepherd's swain,
  While conscious of the deed, he glares around,
  And hears the gathering multitude resound,
  Timely he flies the yet-untasted food,
  And gains the friendly shelter of the wood:
  So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue,
  While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;
  But enter'd in the Grecian ranks, he turns
  His manly breast, and with new fury burns.

  Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,
  Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove:
  The sire of gods, confirming Thetis' prayer,
  The Grecian ardour quench'd in deep despair;
  But lifts to glory Troy's prevailing bands,
  Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
  On Ida's top he waits with longing eyes,
  To view the navy blazing to the skies;
  Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn,
  The Trojans fly, and conquer'd Ilion burn.
  These fates revolved in his almighty mind,
  He raises Hector to the work design'd,
  Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
  And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
  So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call,
  Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
  Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,
  Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
  He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow
  Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow:
  The radiant helmet on his temple burns,
  Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
  For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown,
  And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
  Unhappy glories! for his fate was near,
  Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides' spear:
  Yet Jove deferr'd the death he was to pay,
  And gave what fate allow'd, the honours of a day!

  Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes
  Burn at each foe, and single every prize;
  Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight,
  He points his ardour, and exerts his might.
  The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower,
  On all sides batter'd, yet resists his power:
  So some tall rock o'erhangs the hoary main,(241)
  By winds assail'd, by billows beat in vain,
  Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow,
  And sees the watery mountains break below.
  Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall
  Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:
  Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends,
  And, swell'd with tempests, on the ship descends;
  White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud
  Howl o'er the masts, and sing through every shroud:
  Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears;
  And instant death on every wave appears.
  So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet,
  The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet.

  As when a lion, rushing from his den,
  Amidst the plain of some wide-water'd fen,
  (Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,
  At large expatiate o'er the ranker mead)
  Leaps on the herds before the herdsman's eyes;
  The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;
  Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
  He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
  Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew
  All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew:
  Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,
  In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame;
  The minister of stern Eurystheus' ire
  Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire:
  The son redeem'd the honours of the race,
  A son as generous as the sire was base;
  O'er all his country's youth conspicuous far
  In every virtue, or of peace or war:
  But doom'd to Hector's stronger force to yield!
  Against the margin of his ample shield
  He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;
  Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung.
  On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press'd,
  And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
  His circling friends, who strove to guard too late
  The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.

  Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train
  Now man the next, receding toward the main:
  Wedged in one body at the tents they stand,
  Wall'd round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
  Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;
  Now fear itself confines them to the fight:
  Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most
  (The sage preserver of the Grecian host)
  Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;
  And by their parents, by themselves implores.

  "Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame
  With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
  Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care
  Your wives, your infants, and your parents share:
  Think of each living father's reverend head;
  Think of each ancestor with glory dead;
  Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
  They ask their safety, and their fame, from you:
  The gods their fates on this one action lay,
  And all are lost, if you desert the day."

  He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires;
  Minerva seconds what the sage inspires.
  The mist of darkness Jove around them threw
  She clear'd, restoring all the war to view;
  A sudden ray shot beaming o'er the plain,
  And show'd the shores, the navy, and the main:
  Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight,
  The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light,
  First of the field great Ajax strikes their eyes,
  His port majestic, and his ample size:
  A ponderous mace with studs of iron crown'd,
  Full twenty cubits long, he swings around;
  Nor fights, like others, fix'd to certain stands
  But looks a moving tower above the bands;
  High on the decks with vast gigantic stride,
  The godlike hero stalks from side to side.
  So when a horseman from the watery mead
  (Skill'd in the manage of the bounding steed)
  Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey,
  To some great city through the public way;
  Safe in his art, as side by side they run,
  He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one;
  And now to this, and now to that he flies;
  Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.

  From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
  No less the wonder of the warring crew.
  As furious, Hector thunder'd threats aloud,
  And rush'd enraged before the Trojan crowd;
  Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores
  Lay rank'd contiguous on the bending shores;
  So the strong eagle from his airy height,
  Who marks the swans' or cranes' embodied flight,
  Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,
  And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
  Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,
  And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
  The warring nations meet, the battle roars,
  Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
  Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire,
  No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;
  As if new vigour from new fights they won,
  And the long battle was but then begun.
  Greece, yet unconquer'd, kept alive the war,
  Secure of death, confiding in despair:
  Troy in proud hopes already view'd the main
  Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain:
  Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,
  And each contends, as his were all the war.

  "Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand
  First seized a ship on that contested strand;
  The same which dead Protesilaus bore,(242)
  The first that touch'd the unhappy Trojan shore:
  For this in arms the warring nations stood,
  And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.
  No room to poise the lance or bend the bow;
  But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow:
  Wounded, they wound; and seek each other's hearts
  With falchions, axes, swords, and shorten'd darts.
  The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound,
  Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground;
  With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  Still raging, Hector with his ample hand
  Grasps the high stern, and gives this loud command:

             [Illustration: AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.]

                     AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS.


  "Haste, bring the flames! that toil of ten long years
  Is finished; and the day desired appears!
  This happy day with acclamations greet,
  Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
  The coward-counsels of a timorous throng
  Of reverend dotards check'd our glory long:
  Too long Jove lull'd us with lethargic charms,
  But now in peals of thunder calls to arms:
  In this great day he crowns our full desires,
  Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires."

  He spoke--the warriors at his fierce command
  Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band.
  Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,)
  Stepp'd back, and doubted or to live or die.
  Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait
  What chief approaching dares attempt his fate:
  Even to the last his naval charge defends,
  Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends;
  Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires,
  Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires.

  "O friends! O heroes! names for ever dear,
  Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war!
  Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown,
  Your great forefathers' virtues and your own.
  What aids expect you in this utmost strait?
  What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
  No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend,
  No friends to help, no city to defend.
  This spot is all you have, to lose or keep;
  There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep.
  'Tis hostile ground you tread; your native lands
  Far, far from hence: your fates are in your hands."

  Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath,
  But turns his javelin to the work of death.
  Whate'er bold Trojan arm'd his daring hands,
  Against the sable ships, with flaming brands,
  So well the chief his naval weapon sped,
  The luckless warrior at his stern lay dead:
  Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

                    [Illustration: CASTOR AND POLLUX.]

                            CASTOR AND POLLUX.





BOOK XVI.


ARGUMENT

THE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS

Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book)
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks with
Achilles' troops and armour. He agrees to it, but at the same time charges
him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without further pursuit of
the enemy. The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are described.
Achilles offers a libation for the success of his friend, after which
Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The Trojans, at the sight of
Patroclus in Achilles' armour, taking him for that hero, are cast into the
uttermost consternation; he beats them off from the vessels, Hector
himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was averse to his fate.
Several other particulars of the battle are described; in the heat of
which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders of Achilles, pursues the foe to
the walls of Troy, where Apollo repulses and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds
him, and Hector kills him, which concludes the book.

  So warr'd both armies on the ensanguined shore,
  While the black vessels smoked with human gore.
  Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
  The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes
  Not faster, trickling to the plains below,
  From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
  Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
  Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:(243)

  "Patroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears,
  That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
  No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps
  From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;
  Not more the mother's soul, that infant warms,
  Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms,
  Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end
  Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?

  "Griev'st thou for me, or for, my martial band?
  Or come sad tidings from our native land?
  Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),
  Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air,
  And hoary Peleus yet extends his days;
  Pleased in their age to hear their children's praise.
  Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
  Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,
  Doom'd in their ships to sink by fire and sword,
  And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord?
  Whate'er the cause, reveal thy secret care,
  And speak those sorrows which a friend would share."
  A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,
  Another follow'd, and Patroclus spoke:

  "Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,
  Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
  Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent,
  Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:
  Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' son,
  And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,
  More for their country's wounds than for their own.
  Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,
  Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
  May never rage like thine my soul enslave,
  O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
  Thy country slighted in her last distress,
  What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
  No--men unborn, and ages yet behind,
  Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.

  "O man unpitying! if of man thy race;
  But sure thou spring'st not from a soft embrace,
  Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth,
  Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:
  Some rugged rock's hard entrails gave thee form,
  And raging seas produced thee in a storm,
  A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind,
  So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.

  "If some dire oracle thy breast alarm,
  If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,
  Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
  If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:
  Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear,
  Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war;
  Without thy person Greece shall win the day,
  And thy mere image chase her foes away.
  Press'd by fresh forces, her o'erlabour'd train
  Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again."
  Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,
  Thou begg'st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
  Unfortunately good! a boding sigh
  Thy friend return'd; and with it, this reply:
  "Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears;
  Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;
  Nor aught a mother's caution can suggest;
  The tyrant's pride lies rooted in my breast.
  My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage,
  Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:
  I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong
  Even my: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
  The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,
  Due to the toils of many a well-fought day;
  Due to my conquest of her father's reign;
  Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
  From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the meanest slave.
  But bear we this--the wrongs I grieve are past;
  'Tis time our fury should relent at last:
  I fix'd its date; the day I wish'd appears:
  How Hector to my ships his battle bears,
  The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears.
  Go then, Patroclus! court fair honour's charms
  In Troy's famed fields, and in Achilles' arms:
  Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,
  Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right.
  See the thin relics of their baffled band
  At the last edge of yon deserted land!
  Behold all Ilion on their ships descends;
  How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
  It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,
  Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed:
  Had not the injurious king our friendship lost,
  Yon ample trench had buried half her host.
  No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear,
  Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there;
  No longer flames the lance of Tydeus' son;
  No more your general calls his heroes on:
  Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath
  Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.
  Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain:
  Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain,
  And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
  But heed my words, and mark a friend's command,
  Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand,
  And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host
  Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost:
  Rage uncontroll'd through all the hostile crew,
  But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
  Though Jove in thunder should command the war,
  Be just, consult my glory, and forbear.
  The fleet once saved, desist from further chase,
  Nor lead to Ilion's walls the Grecian race;
  Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy;
  Some god, like Phoebus, ever kind to Troy.
  Let Greece, redeem'd from this destructive strait,
  Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate.
  O! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
  That not one Trojan might be left alive,
  And not a Greek of all the race survive:
  Might only we the vast destruction shun,
  And only we destroy the accursed town!"
  Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand
  Great Jove with conquest crown'd the Trojan band.
  Ajax no more the sounding storm sustain'd,
  So thick the darts an iron tempest rain'd:
  On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung;
  His hollow helm with falling javelins rung;
  His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;
  And painful sweat from all his members flows.
  Spent and o'erpower'd, he barely breathes at most;
  Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post;
  Dangers on dangers all around him glow,
  And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.

  Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame,
  How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?

  Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near,
  Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,
  Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped,
  That the broad falchion lopp'd its brazen head;
  His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;
  The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
  Great Ajax saw, and own'd the hand divine;
  Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign,
  Warn'd he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
  The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower;
  O'er the high stern the curling volumes rise,
  And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.

  Divine Achilles view'd the rising flames,
  And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:
  "Arm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires!
  The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
  Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame;
  Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;
  I haste to bring the troops."--The hero said;
  The friend with ardour and with joy obey'd.

  He cased his limbs in brass; and first around
  His manly legs, with silver buckles bound
  The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies
  The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes;
  Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone
  In the rich belt, as in a starry zone:
  Achilles' shield his ample shoulders spread,
  Achilles' helmet nodded o'er his head:
  Adorn'd in all his terrible array,
  He flash'd around intolerable day.
  Alone untouch'd, Pelides' javelin stands,
  Not to be poised but by Pelides' hands:
  From Pelion's shady brow the plant entire
  Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his sire;
  Whose son's great arm alone the weapon wields,
  The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

                         [Illustration: Buckles.]

                                 Buckles.


  The brave Automedon (an honour'd name,
  The second to his lord in love and fame,
  In peace his friend, and partner of the war)
  The winged coursers harness'd to the car;
  Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed,
  Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.
  Whom the wing'd harpy, swift Podarge, bore,
  By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore:
  Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
  (Once great Aetion's, now Achilles' pride)
  Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,
  A mortal courser match'd the immortal race.

  Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms
  His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
  All breathing death, around the chief they stand,
  A grim, terrific, formidable band:
  Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs(244)
  When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;
  When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,
  Has drench'd their wide insatiate throats with blood,
  To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,
  With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue,
  Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore,
  And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.
  Like furious, rush'd the Myrmidonian crew,
  Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.

  High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
  Directs their order, and the war commands.
  He, loved of Jove, had launch'd for Ilion's shores
  Full fifty vessels, mann'd with fifty oars:
  Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey,
  Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.

  First march'd Menestheus, of celestial birth,
  Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,
  Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood!
  A mortal mother mixing with a god.
  Such was Menestheus, but miscall'd by fame
  The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.

  Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
  Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
  Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze,
  As with swift step she form'd the running maze:
  To her high chamber from Diana's quire,
  The god pursued her, urged, and crown'd his fire.
  The son confess'd his father's heavenly race,
  And heir'd his mother's swiftness in the chase.
  Strong Echecleus, bless'd in all those charms
  That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms;
  Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame,
  With gifts of price he sought and won the dame;
  Her secret offspring to her sire she bare;
  Her sire caress'd him with a parent's care.

  Pisander follow'd; matchless in his art
  To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;
  No hand so sure of all the Emathian line,
  Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.

  The fourth by Phoenix' grave command was graced,
  Laerces' valiant offspring led the last.

  Soon as Achilles with superior care
  Had call'd the chiefs, and order'd all the war,
  This stern remembrance to his troops he gave:
  "Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
  Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,
  Think what reproach these ears endured so long;
  'Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,
  While restless, raging, in your ships you lay)
  Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield;
  Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:
  If that dire fury must for ever burn,
  What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!'
  Such were your words--Now, warriors! grieve no more,
  Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
  This day shall give you all your soul demands,
  Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!"

                          [Illustration: DIANA.]

                                  DIANA.


  Thus while he roused the fire in every breast,
  Close and more close the listening cohorts press'd;
  Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring
  Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.
  As when a circling wall the builder forms,
  Of strength defensive against wind and storms,
  Compacted stones the thickening work compose,
  And round him wide the rising structure grows:
  So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,
  Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along;
  Thick, undistinguish'd plumes, together join'd,
  Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.

  Far o'er the rest in glittering pomp appear,
  There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;
  Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired;
  Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.

  But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
  To the rich coffer in his shady tent;
  There lay on heaps his various garments roll'd,
  And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold,
  (The presents of the silver-footed dame)
  From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame,
  Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,
  Nor raised in offerings to the power divine,
  But Peleus' son; and Peleus' son to none
  Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone.
  This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame,
  He purged; and wash'd it in the running stream.
  Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space
  His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place
  Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pour'd
  Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored:

  "O thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
  O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
  Who 'midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,
  Presid'st on bleak Dodona's vocal hill:
  (Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,
  Their feet unwash'd, their slumbers on the ground;
  Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees;
  And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;)
  Hear, as of old! Thou gav'st, at Thetis' prayer,
  Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair.
  Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field
  The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield,
  Though still determined, to my ships confined;
  Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
  Oh! be his guard thy providential care,
  Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war:
  Press'd by his single force let Hector see
  His fame in arms not owing all to me.
  But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire,
  Let him with conquest and renown retire;
  Preserve his arms, preserve his social train,
  And safe return him to these eyes again!"

  Great Jove consents to half the chief's request,
  But heaven's eternal doom denies the rest;
  To free the fleet was granted to his prayer;
  His safe return, the winds dispersed in air.
  Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies,
  And waits the combat with impatient eyes.

  Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclus' care,
  Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
  As wasps, provoked by children in their play,
  Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,
  In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,
  Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage:
  All rise in arms, and, with a general cry,
  Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny.
  Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,
  So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms:
  Their rising rage Patroclus' breath inspires,
  Who thus inflames them with heroic fires:

  "O warriors, partners of Achilles' praise!
  Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days;
  Your godlike master let your acts proclaim,
  And add new glories to his mighty name.
  Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave,
  And humble the proud monarch whom you save."

  Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke,
  Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.
  From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound,
  The hollow ships return a deeper sound.
  The war stood still, and all around them gazed,
  When great Achilles' shining armour blazed:
  Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,
  At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.

  Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
  Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
  Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore
  Unbless'd Protesilaus to Ilion's shore,
  The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood;
  (Who led his bands from Axius' winding flood;)
  His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;
  The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
  His troops, that see their country's glory slain,
  Fly diverse, scatter'd o'er the distant plain.
  Patroclus' arm forbids the spreading fires,
  And from the half-burn'd ship proud Troy retires;
  Clear'd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
  In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
  Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
  And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
  So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain's head,
  O'er heaven's expanse like one black ceiling spread;
  Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
  Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
  The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
  And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
  The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
  And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

  But Troy repulsed, and scatter'd o'er the plains,
  Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
  Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
  But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
  As Areilycus had turn'd him round,
  Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
  The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
  The thigh transfix'd, and broke the brittle bone:
  Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
  Thy breast, unarm'd, received the Spartan lance.
  Phylides' dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
  His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,
  Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away;
  In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.

  In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand,
  And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:
  By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies,
  Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies,
  Kind Maris, bleeding in his brother's wound,
  Defends the breathless carcase on the ground;
  Furious he flies, his murderer to engage:
  But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage,
  Between his arm and shoulder aims a blow;
  His arm falls spouting on the dust below:
  He sinks, with endless darkness cover'd o'er:
  And vents his soul, effused with gushing gore.

  Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed,
  Sarpedon's friends, Amisodarus' seed;
  Amisodarus, who, by Furies led,
  The bane of men, abhorr'd Chimaera bred;
  Skill'd in the dart in vain, his sons expire,
  And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire.

  Stopp'd in the tumult Cleobulus lies,
  Beneath Oileus' arm, a living prize;
  A living prize not long the Trojan stood;
  The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood:
  Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies;
  Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes.

  Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame,
  Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;
  In vain their javelins at each other flew,
  Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.
  On the plumed crest of his Boeotian foe
  The daring Lycon aim'd a noble blow;
  The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped
  Full on the juncture of the neck and head:
  The head, divided by a stroke so just,
  Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.

  O'ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds,
  Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground:
  His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.

  Next Erymas was doom'd his fate to feel,
  His open'd mouth received the Cretan steel:
  Beneath the brain the point a passage tore,
  Crash'd the thin bones, and drown'd the teeth in gore:
  His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood;
  He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.

  As when the flocks neglected by the swain,
  Or kids, or lambs, lie scatter'd o'er the plain,
  A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey,
  And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:
  Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came;
  Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.

  But still at Hector godlike Ajax aim'd,
  Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
  The Trojan chief, experienced in the field,
  O'er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield,
  Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,
  And on his buckler caught the ringing shower:
  He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,
  Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.

  As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,
  And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,
  Dark o'er the fields the ascending vapour flies,
  And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:
  So from the ships, along the dusky plain,
  Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
  Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray
  The fiery coursers forced their lord away:
  While far behind his Trojans fall confused;
  Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised:
  Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes
  Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
  In vain they labour up the steepy mound;
  Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
  Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
  Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
  Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
  Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch'd from sight.
  The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
  Scour o'er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
  Loud o'er the rout was heard the victor's cry,
  Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die,
  Where horse and arms, and chariots he o'erthrown,
  And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
  No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew:
  From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
  High-bounding o'er the fosse, the whirling car
  Smokes through the ranks, o'ertakes the flying war,
  And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
  Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies.
  Not with less noise, with less impetuous force,
  The tide of Trojans urge their desperate course,
  Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours,
  And earth is loaden with incessant showers;
  (When guilty mortals break the eternal laws,
  Or judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;)
  From their deep beds he bids the rivers rise,
  And opens all the flood-gates of the skies:
  The impetuous torrents from their hills obey,
  Whole fields are drown'd, and mountains swept away;
  Loud roars the deluge till it meets the main;
  And trembling man sees all his labours vain!

  And now the chief (the foremost troops repell'd)
  Back to the ships his destined progress held,
  Bore down half Troy in his resistless way,
  And forced the routed ranks to stand the day.
  Between the space where silver Simois flows,
  Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose,
  All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands,
  And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.
  First Pronous died beneath his fiery dart,
  Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.
  Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear,
  And fell the victim of his coward fear;
  Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye,
  Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly;
  Patroclus mark'd him as he shunn'd the war,
  And with unmanly tremblings shook the car,
  And dropp'd the flowing reins. Him 'twixt the jaws,
  The javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws.
  As on a rock that overhangs the main,
  An angler, studious of the line and cane,
  Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore:
  Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore
  The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook,
  He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.

  Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone,
  Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:
  Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew,
  And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:
  Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell,
  And death involved him with the shades of hell.
  Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
  Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
  Amphoterus and Erymas succeed;
  And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
  Where'er he moves, the growing slaughters spread
  In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.

  When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld
  Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,
  With this reproach his flying host he warms:
  "Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
  Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;
  This hand unaided shall the war sustain:
  The task be mine this hero's strength to try,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly."

  He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:
  Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
  As when two vultures on the mountain's height
  Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight;
  They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry;
  The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:
  The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage
  With equal clamours, and with equal rage.

  Jove view'd the combat: whose event foreseen,
  He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:
  "The hour draws on; the destinies ordain,(245)
  My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain:
  Already on the verge of death he stands,
  His life is owed to fierce Patroclus' hands,
  What passions in a parent's breast debate!
  Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate,
  And send him safe to Lycia, distant far
  From all the dangers and the toils of war;
  Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield,
  And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?"

  Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes:
  "What words are these, O sovereign of the skies!
  Short is the date prescribed to mortal man;
  Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span,
  Whose bounds were fix'd before his race began?
  How many sons of gods, foredoom'd to death,
  Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!
  Were thine exempt, debate would rise above,
  And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.
  Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight;
  And when the ascending soul has wing'd her flight,
  Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command,
  The breathless body to his native land.
  His friends and people, to his future praise,
  A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise,
  And lasting honours to his ashes give;
  His fame ('tis all the dead can have) shall live."

  She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,
  Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
  Then touch'd with grief, the weeping heavens distill'd
  A shower of blood o'er all the fatal field:
  The god, his eyes averting from the plain,
  Laments his son, predestined to be slain,
  Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
  Now met in arms, the combatants appear;
  Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;
  From strong Patroclus' hand the javelin fled,
  And pass'd the groin of valiant Thrasymed;
  The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain,
  He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
  Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw:
  The first aloof with erring fury flew,
  The next transpierced Achilles' mortal steed,
  The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:
  Fix'd in the shoulder's joint, he reel'd around,
  Roll'd in the bloody dust, and paw'd the slippery ground.
  His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;
  Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook:
  When bold Automedon, to disengage
  The starting coursers, and restrain their rage,
  Divides the traces with his sword, and freed
  The encumbered chariot from the dying steed:
  The rest move on, obedient to the rein:
  The car rolls slowly o'er the dusty plain.

  The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance:
  And first Sarpedon whirl'd his weighty lance,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its dying force.
  Not so Patroclus' never-erring dart;
  Aim'd at his breast it pierced a mortal part,
  Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
  Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)
  Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound
  It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground,
  Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine,
  Before his chariot stretch'd his form divine:
  He grasp'd the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
  And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore.
  So lies a bull beneath the lion's paws,
  While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws
  The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood;
  Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.

  Then to the leader of the Lycian band
  The dying chief address'd his last command;
  "Glaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare
  The glorious dangers of destructive war,
  To lead my troops, to combat at their head,
  Incite the living, and supply the dead.
  Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath
  Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedon's death.
  What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo,
  If these spoil'd arms adorn a Grecian foe!
  Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight;
  Defend my body, conquer in my right:
  That, taught by great examples, all may try
  Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die."
  He ceased; the Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
  And his eyes darken'd with the shades of death.
  The insulting victor with disdain bestrode
  The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod;
  Then drew the weapon from his panting heart,
  The reeking fibres clinging to the dart;
  From the wide wound gush'd out a stream of blood,
  And the soul issued in the purple flood.
  His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain,
  Unguided now, their mighty master slain.
  All-impotent of aid, transfix'd with grief,
  Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief:
  His painful arm, yet useless with the smart
  Inflicted late by Teucer's deadly dart,
  Supported on his better hand he stay'd:
  To Phoebus then ('twas all he could) he pray'd:

  "All-seeing monarch! whether Lycia's coast,
  Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast,
  Powerful alike to ease the wretch's smart;
  O hear me! god of every healing art!
  Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,
  That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein,
  I stand unable to sustain the spear,
  And sigh, at distance from the glorious war.
  Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid,
  Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid;
  But thou, O god of health! thy succour lend,
  To guard the relics of my slaughter'd friend:
  For thou, though distant, canst restore my might,
  To head my Lycians, and support the fight."

  Apollo heard; and, suppliant as he stood,
  His heavenly hand restrain'd the flux of blood;
  He drew the dolours from the wounded part,
  And breathed a spirit in his rising heart.
  Renew'd by art divine, the hero stands,
  And owns the assistance of immortal hands.
  First to the fight his native troops he warms,
  Then loudly calls on Troy's vindictive arms;
  With ample strides he stalks from place to place;
  Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas:
  Cneas next, and Hector he accosts;
  Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts.

  "What thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?
  Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy!
  Those generous friends, who, from their country far,
  Breathe their brave souls out in another's war.
  See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies,
  In action valiant, and in council wise,
  Who guarded right, and kept his people free;
  To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
  Stretch'd by Patroclus' arm on yonder plains,
  O save from hostile rage his loved remains!
  Ah let not Greece his conquer'd trophies boast,
  Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!"

  He spoke: each leader in his grief partook:
  Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook.
  Transfix'd with deep regret, they view o'erthrown
  At once his country's pillar, and their own;
  A chief, who led to Troy's beleaguer'd wall
  A host of heroes, and outshined them all.
  Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes,
  And with superior vengeance greatly glows.

  But o'er the dead the fierce Patroclus stands,
  And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands:

  "Heroes, be men; be what you were before;
  Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
  The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield,
  Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
  To guard his body Troy in numbers flies;
  Tis half the glory to maintain our prize.
  Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
  And send the living Lycians to the dead."

  The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
  The martial squadrons close on either hand:
  Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
  Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
  With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
  The clash of armour rings o'er all the plain.
  Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
  O'er the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
  And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
  His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

  Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
  Agacleus' son, from Budium's lofty walls;
  Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
  To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
  Now sent to Troy, Achilles' arms to aid,
  He pays due vengeance to his kinsman's shade.
  Soon as his luckless hand had touch'd the dead,
  A rock's large fragment thunder'd on his head;
  Hurl'd by Hectorean force it cleft in twain
  His shatter'd helm, and stretch'd him o'er the slain.

  Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came,
  And, like an eagle darting at his game,
  Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
  What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,
  O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,
  At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone,
  Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
  That arm, drew back; and Hector learn'd to fear.
  Far as an able hand a lance can throw,
  Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe;
  So far the Trojans from their lines retired;
  Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
  Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,
  The only hope of Chalcon's trembling age;
  Wide o'er the land was stretch'd his large domain,
  With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:
  Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue
  The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;
  Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound,
  He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
  The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;
  With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain,
  And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose;
  An iron circle round the carcase grows.

  Then brave Laogonus resign'd his breath,
  Despatch'd by Merion to the shades of death:
  On Ida's holy hill he made abode,
  The priest of Jove, and honour'd like his god.
  Between the jaw and ear the javelin went;
  The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
  His spear Aeneas at the victor threw,
  Who stooping forward from the death withdrew;
  The lance hiss'd harmless o'er his covering shield,
  And trembling struck, and rooted in the field;
  There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain,
  Sent by the great Aeneas' arm in vain.
  "Swift as thou art (the raging hero cries)
  And skill'd in dancing to dispute the prize,
  My spear, the destined passage had it found,
  Had fix'd thy active vigour to the ground."

  "O valiant leader of the Dardan host!
  (Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)
  Strong as you are, 'tis mortal force you trust,
  An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
  And if to this my lance thy fate be given,
  Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven:
  This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto's coast;
  Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost."

  "O friend (Menoetius' son this answer gave)
  With words to combat, ill befits the brave;
  Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel,
  Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
  To speak, beseems the council; but to dare
  In glorious action, is the task of war."

  This said, Patroclus to the battle flies;
  Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:
  Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close;
  And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
  As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,
  The labours of the woodman's axe resound;
  Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,
  While crackling forests fall on every side:
  Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,
  So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.

  Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,
  His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,
  And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed,
  Lies undistinguish'd from the vulgar dead.
  His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose,
  On every side the busy combat grows;
  Thick as beneath some shepherd's thatch'd abode
  (The pails high foaming with a milky flood)
  The buzzing flies, a persevering train,
  Incessant swarm, and chased return again.

  Jove view'd the combat with a stern survey,
  And eyes that flash'd intolerable day.
  Fix'd on the field his sight, his breast debates
  The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
  Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call
  The force of Hector to Patroclus' fall,
  This instant see his short-lived trophies won,
  And stretch him breathless on his slaughter'd son;
  Or yet, with many a soul's untimely flight,
  Augment the fame and horror of the fight.
  To crown Achilles' valiant friend with praise
  At length he dooms; and, that his last of days
  Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe;
  Nor unattended see the shades below.
  Then Hector's mind he fills with dire dismay;
  He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away;
  Sunk with Troy's heavy fates, he sees decline
  The scales of Jove, and pants with awe divine.

  Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,
  And left their monarch with the common dead:
  Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall
  Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall.
  (So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain
  The prize contested, and despoil the slain.
  The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne;
  Patroclus' ships the glorious spoils adorn.

  Then thus to Phoebus, in the realms above,
  Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove:
  "Descend, my Phoebus! on the Phrygian plain,
  And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain;
  Then bathe his body in the crystal flood,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with blood;
  O'er all his limbs ambrosial odours shed,
  And with celestial robes adorn the dead.
  Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath
  To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death.
  They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear;
  His friends a tomb and pyramid shall rear:
  What honour mortals after death receive,
  Those unavailing honours we may give!"

 [Illustration: SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.]

         SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA.


  Apollo bows, and from mount Ida's height,
  Swift to the field precipitates his flight;
  Thence from the war the breathless hero bore,
  Veil'd in a cloud, to silver Simois' shore;
  There bathed his honourable wounds, and dress'd
  His manly members in the immortal vest;
  And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
  Restores his freshness, and his form renews.
  Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race,
  Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,
  Received Sarpedon, at the god's command,
  And in a moment reach'd the Lycian land;
  The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
  Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

  Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
  With foaming coursers, and with loosen'd reins.
  Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
  Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew
  Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
  Vain was thy friend's command, thy courage vain.
  For he, the god, whose counsels uncontroll'd
  Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold;
  The god who gives, resumes, and orders all,
  He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.

  Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain,
  Who last beneath thy vengeance press'd the plain;
  When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,
  And call'd to fill the number of the dead?
  Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;
  Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds,
  Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;
  The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crown'd:
  Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;
  The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.

  Now Troy had stoop'd beneath his matchless power,
  But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred tower
  Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;(246)
  His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook;
  He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud,
  A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

  "Patroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall
  Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;
  Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
  Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles' hand."

  So spoke the god who darts celestial fires;
  The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires.
  While Hector, checking at the Scaean gates
  His panting coursers, in his breast debates,
  Or in the field his forces to employ,
  Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy.
  Thus while he thought, beside him Phoebus stood,
  In Asius' shape, who reigned by Sangar's flood;
  (Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung,
  A valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;)
  Thus he accosts him. "What a shameful sight!
  God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?
  Were thine my vigour this successful spear
  Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
  Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame,
  And in Patroclus' blood efface thy shame.
  Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed,
  And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed."

  So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,
  And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
  He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;
  The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
  The god the Grecians' sinking souls depress'd,
  And pour'd swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
  Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;
  A spear his left, a stone employs his right:
  With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  The falling ruin crush'd Cebrion's head,
  The lawless offspring of king Priam's bed;
  His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguish'd wound:
  The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
  The charioteer, while yet he held the rein,
  Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
  To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,
  While the proud victor thus his fall derides.

  "Good heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!
  What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
  Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
  Pity that all their practice is by land!"

  Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize,
  To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:
  Swift as a lion, terrible and bold,
  That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;
  Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,
  And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
  At once bold Hector leaping from his car,
  Defends the body, and provokes the war.
  Thus for some slaughter'd hind, with equal rage,
  Two lordly rulers of the wood engage;
  Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,
  And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
  Stern Hector fastens on the warrior's head,
  And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead:
  While all around, confusion, rage, and fright,
  Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.
  So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud
  In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood;
  Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown,
  The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;
  This way and that, the rattling thicket bends,
  And the whole forest in one crash descends.
  Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage,
  In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
  Darts shower'd on darts, now round the carcase ring;
  Now flights of arrows bounding from the string:
  Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields,
  Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.
  But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains,
  Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains,
  And, stretch'd in death, forgets the guiding reins!

  Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven
  His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven;
  While on each host with equal tempests fell
  The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.
  But when his evening wheels o'erhung the main,
  Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.
  Then from amidst the tumult and alarms,
  They draw the conquer'd corse and radiant arms.
  Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows,
  And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
  Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew,
  And thrice three heroes at each onset slew.
  There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine
  The last, black remnant of so bright a line:
  Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;
  Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day!

  For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined,
  Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
  The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel;
  His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn'd senses reel
  In giddy darkness; far to distance flung,
  His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
  Achilles' plume is stain'd with dust and gore;
  That plume which never stoop'd to earth before;
  Long used, untouch'd, in fighting fields to shine,
  And shade the temples of the mad divine.
  Jove dooms it now on Hector's helm to nod;
  Not long--for fate pursues him, and the god.

  His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
  Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
  The corslet his astonish'd breast forsakes:
  Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
  Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
  Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

  A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
  From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
  Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
  Skill'd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
  Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
  While yet he learn'd his rudiments of war.
  His venturous spear first drew the hero's gore;
  He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
  Nor, though disarm'd, Patroclus' fury stood:
  But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
  And turn'd him short, and herded in the crowd.
  Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
  Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
  Retires for succour to his social train,
  And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
  Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
  Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
  The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
  He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
  With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
  Her yet-surviving heroes seem'd to fall.
  So, scorch'd with heat, along the desert score,
  The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
  Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,
  With flaming eyes, and jaws besmear'd with blood;
  At length the sovereign savage wins the strife;
  And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
  Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o'erthrown,
  So many lives effused, expires his own.
  As dying now at Hector's feet he lies,
  He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:

  "Lie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy
  Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
  The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames,
  And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames.
  Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free,
  And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee:
  But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made;
  Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid;
  Though much at parting that great chief might say,
  And much enjoin thee, this important day.

  'Return not, my brave friend (perhaps he said),
  Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.'
  He spoke, Patroclus march'd, and thus he sped."

  Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies,
  With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies:

  "Vain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine!
  Jove's and Apollo's is this deed, not thine;
  To heaven is owed whate'er your own you call,
  And heaven itself disarm'd me ere my fall.
  Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might,
  Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight:
  By fate and Phoebus was I first o'erthrown,
  Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own.
  But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath;
  The gods inspire it, and it sounds thy death:
  Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I;
  Black fate o'erhangs thee, and thy hour draws nigh;
  Even now on life's last verge I see thee stand,
  I see thee fall, and by Achilles' hand."

  He faints: the soul unwilling wings her way,
  (The beauteous body left a load of clay)
  Flits to the lone, uncomfortable coast;
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed
  On the pale carcase, thus address'd the dead:

  "From whence this boding speech, the stern decree
  Of death denounced, or why denounced to me?
  Why not as well Achilles' fate be given
  To Hector's lance? Who knows the will of heaven?"

  Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay
  His breathless bosom, tore the lance away;
  And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear
  He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer.
  But swift Automedon with loosen'd reins
  Rapt in the chariot o'er the distant plains,
  Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;
  The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove.

                       [Illustration: CSCULAPIUS.]

                               CSCULAPIUS.





BOOK XVII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.--THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.

Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy:
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus retires;
but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This, Glaucus objects to
Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had won from
Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till Ajax rallies
them: Aeneas sustains the Trojans. Aeneas and Hector Attempt the chariot
of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The horses of Achilles
deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with a thick
darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. Menelaus sends
Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclus' death: then returns to
the fight, where, though attacked with the utmost fury, he and Meriones,
assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body to the ships.

The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies in
the fields before Troy.

  On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread,
  Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
  Great Menelaus, touch'd with generous woe,
  Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
  Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,
  Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves;
  And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare)
  Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother's care,
  Opposed to each that near the carcase came,
  His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.

  The son of Panthus, skill'd the dart to send,
  Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.
  "This hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
  Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:
  To me the spoils my prowess won, resign:
  Depart with life, and leave the glory mine"

  The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burn'd
  With generous anguish, and in scorn return'd:
  "Laugh'st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne,
  When mortals boast of prowess not their own?
  Not thus the lion glories in his might,
  Nor panther braves his spotted foe in fight,
  Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the plain;)
  Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain.
  But far the vainest of the boastful kind,
  These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
  Yet 'twas but late, beneath my conquering steel
  This boaster's brother, Hyperenor, fell;
  Against our arm which rashly he defied,
  Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
  These eyes beheld him on the dust expire,
  No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire.
  Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,
  Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom;
  Or, while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
  Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

  Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: "That action known,
  Come, for my brother's blood repay thy own.
  His weeping father claims thy destined head,
  And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
  On these thy conquer'd spoils I shall bestow,
  To soothe a consort's and a parent's woe.
  No longer then defer the glorious strife,
  Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life."

  Swift as the word the missile lance he flings;
  The well-aim'd weapon on the buckler rings,
  But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
  On Jove the father great Atrides calls,
  Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,
  It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain;
  Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,
  Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound.
  The shining circlets of his golden hair,
  Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
  Instarr'd with gems and gold, bestrow the shore,
  With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with gore.

  As the young olive, in some sylvan scene,
  Crown'd by fresh fountains with eternal green,
  Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair,
  And plays and dances to the gentle air;
  When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades
  The tender plant, and withers all its shades;
  It lies uprooted from its genial bed,
  A lovely ruin now defaced and dead:
  Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
  While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away.
  Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,
  Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies:
  Flies, as before some mountain lion's ire
  The village curs and trembling swains retire,
  When o'er the slaughter'd bull they hear him roar,
  And see his jaws distil with smoking gore:
  All pale with fear, at distance scatter'd round,
  They shout incessant, and the vales resound.

  Meanwhile Apollo view'd with envious eyes,
  And urged great Hector to dispute the prize;
  (In Mentes' shape, beneath whose martial care
  The rough Ciconians learn'd the trade of war;)(247)
  "Forbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase
  Achilles' coursers, of ethereal race;
  They stoop not, these, to mortal man's command,
  Or stoop to none but great Achilles' hand.
  Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,
  Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain;
  By Sparta slain! for ever now suppress'd
  The fire which burn'd in that undaunted breast!"

  Thus having spoke, Apollo wing'd his flight,
  And mix'd with mortals in the toils of fight:
  His words infix'd unutterable care
  Deep in great Hector's soul: through all the war
  He darts his anxious eye; and, instant, view'd
  The breathless hero in his blood imbued,
  (Forth welling from the wound, as prone he lay)
  And in the victor's hands the shining prey.
  Sheath'd in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies,
  And sends his voice in thunder to the skies:
  Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent,
  It flew, and fired the nations as it went.
  Atrides from the voice the storm divined,
  And thus explored his own unconquer'd mind:

  "Then shall I quit Patroclus on the plain,
  Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain!
  Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?
  Or singly, Hector and his troops attend?
  Sure where such partial favour heaven bestow'd,
  To brave the hero were to brave the god:
  Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the field;
  'Tis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield.
  Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear,
  Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear:
  Still would we turn, still battle on the plains,
  And give Achilles all that yet remains
  Of his and our Patroclus--" This, no more
  The time allow'd: Troy thicken'd on the shore.
  A sable scene! The terrors Hector led.
  Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead.

  So from the fold the unwilling lion parts,
  Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts;
  He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,
  With heart indignant and retorted eyes.
  Now enter'd in the Spartan ranks, he turn'd
  His manly breast, and with new fury burn'd;
  O'er all the black battalions sent his view,
  And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew;
  Where labouring on the left the warrior stood,
  All grim in arms, and cover'd o'er with blood;
  There breathing courage, where the god of day
  Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.

  To him the king: "Oh Ajax, oh my friend!
  Haste, and Patroclus' loved remains defend:
  The body to Achilles to restore
  Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
  For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies;
  And Hector glories in the dazzling prize."
  He said, and touch'd his heart. The raging pair
  Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
  Already had stern Hector seized his head,
  And doom'd to Trojan gods the unhappy dead;
  But soon as Ajax rear'd his tower-like shield,
  Sprung to his car, and measured back the field,
  His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,
  To stand a trophy of his fame in war.

  Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield display'd)
  Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;
  And now before, and now behind he stood:
  Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
  With many a step, the lioness surrounds
  Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
  Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
  Dark o'er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
  Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows
  With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.

  But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,
  On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids:

  "Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
  A manly form, without a manly mind.
  Is this, O chief! a hero's boasted fame?
  How vain, without the merit, is the name!
  Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ
  What other methods may preserve thy Troy:
  'Tis time to try if Ilion's state can stand
  By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand:
  Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake
  Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
  What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
  Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect;
  Say, shall our slaughter'd bodies guard your walls,
  While unreveng'd the great Sarpedon falls?
  Even where he died for Troy, you left him there,
  A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air.
  On my command if any Lycian wait,
  Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate.
  Did such a spirit as the gods impart
  Impel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart,
  (Such as should burn in every soul that draws
  The sword for glory, and his country's cause)
  Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,
  And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy.
  Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
  Sarpedon's arms and honour'd corse again!
  Greece with Achilles' friend should be repaid,
  And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
  But words are vain--Let Ajax once appear,
  And Hector trembles and recedes with fear;
  Thou dar'st not meet the terrors of his eye;
  And lo! already thou prepar'st to fly."

  The Trojan chief with fix'd resentment eyed
  The Lycian leader, and sedate replied:

  "Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector's ear
  From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
  I deem'd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
  But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
  I shun great Ajax? I desert my train?
  'Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;
  I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds,
  And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
  But Jove's high will is ever uncontroll'd,
  The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;
  Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now
  Strikes the fresh garland from the victor's brow!
  Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,
  And thou be witness, if I fear to-day;
  If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,
  Or yet their hero dare defend the dead."

  Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
  Be men, my friends, in action as in name,
  And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.
  Hector in proud Achilles' arms shall shine,
  Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine."

  He strode along the field, as thus he said:
  (The sable plumage nodded o'er his head:)
  Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look;
  One instant saw, one instant overtook
  The distant band, that on the sandy shore
  The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
  There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow'd;
  His train to Troy convey'd the massy load.
  Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;
  The work and present of celestial hands;
  By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
  As first to Peleus by the court of heaven:
  His father's arms not long Achilles wears,
  Forbid by fate to reach his father's years.

  Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar,
  The god whose thunder rends the troubled air
  Beheld with pity; as apart he sat,
  And, conscious, look'd through all the scene of fate.
  He shook the sacred honours of his head;
  Olympus trembled, and the godhead said;
  "Ah, wretched man! unmindful of thy end!
  A moment's glory; and what fates attend!
  In heavenly panoply divinely bright
  Thou stand'st, and armies tremble at thy sight,
  As at Achilles' self! beneath thy dart
  Lies slain the great Achilles' dearer part.
  Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn,
  Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
  Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day,
  A blaze of glory ere thou fad'st away.
  For ah! no more Andromache shall come
  With joyful tears to welcome Hector home;
  No more officious, with endearing charms,
  From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides' arms!"

  Then with his sable brow he gave the nod
  That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
  The stubborn arms (by Jove's command disposed)
  Conform'd spontaneous, and around him closed:
  Fill'd with the god, enlarged his members grew,
  Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew,
  The blood in brisker tides began to roll,
  And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
  Exhorting loud through all the field he strode,
  And look'd, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
  Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires,
  Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
  The great Thersilochus like fury found,
  Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,
  And Ennomus, in augury renown'd.

  "Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber'd bands
  Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
  'Twas not for state we summon'd you so far,
  To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war:
  Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,
  To save our present, and our future race.
  Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy,
  And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
  Now then, to conquer or to die prepare;
  To die or conquer are the terms of war.
  Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain,
  Whoe'er shall drag him to the Trojan train,
  With Hector's self shall equal honours claim;
  With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame."

  Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears,
  They join, they thicken, they protend their spears;
  Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,
  And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey:
  Vain hope! what numbers shall the field o'erspread,
  What victims perish round the mighty dead!

  Great Ajax mark'd the growing storm from far,
  And thus bespoke his brother of the war:
  "Our fatal day, alas! is come, my friend;
  And all our wars and glories at an end!
  'Tis not this corse alone we guard in vain,
  Condemn'd to vultures on the Trojan plain;
  We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall
  On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.
  See what a tempest direful Hector spreads,
  And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!
  Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call,
  The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all."

  The warrior raised his voice, and wide around
  The field re-echoed the distressful sound.
  "O chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is given
  The rule of men; whose glory is from heaven!
  Whom with due honours both Atrides grace:
  Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race!
  All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far,
  All, whom I see not through this cloud of war;
  Come all! let generous rage your arms employ,
  And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy."

  Oilean Ajax first the voice obey'd,
  Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid:
  Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age,
  And Merion, burning with a hero's rage.
  The long-succeeding numbers who can name?
  But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame.
  Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng;
  Whole Troy embodied rush'd with shouts along.
  Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves,
  Where some swoln river disembogues his waves,
  Full in the mouth is stopp'd the rushing tide,
  The boiling ocean works from side to side,
  The river trembles to his utmost shore,
  And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.

  Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band
  With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
  Jove, pouring darkness o'er the mingled fight,
  Conceals the warriors' shining helms in night:
  To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend
  Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:
  Dead he protects him with superior care.
  Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.

             [Illustration: FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.]

                     FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.


  The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
  Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
  Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
  By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
  (Ajax to Peleus' son the second name,
  In graceful stature next, and next in fame)
  With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
  So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
  And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
  The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
  The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' heir,
  Hippothous, dragg'd the carcase through the war;
  The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound:
  Inevitable fate o'ertakes the deed;
  Doom'd by great Ajax' vengeful lance to bleed:
  It cleft the helmet's brazen cheeks in twain;
  The shatter'd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
  With nerves relax'd he tumbles to the ground:
  The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
  He drops Patroclus' foot, and o'er him spread,
  Now lies a sad companion of the dead:
  Far from Larissa lies, his native air,
  And ill requites his parents' tender care.
  Lamented youth! in life's first bloom he fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

  Once more at Ajax Hector's javelin flies;
  The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,
  Shunn'd the descending death; which hissing on,
  Stretch'd in the dust the great Iphytus' son,
  Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind
  The boldest warrior and the noblest mind:
  In little Panope, for strength renown'd,
  He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
  Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,
  And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood;
  In clanging arms the hero fell and all
  The fields resounded with his weighty fall.

  Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
  The Telamonian lance his belly rends;
  The hollow armour burst before the stroke,
  And through the wound the rushing entrails broke:
  In strong convulsions panting on the sands
  He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.

  Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train:
  The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.
  And now had Troy, by Greece compell'd to yield,
  Fled to her ramparts, and resign'd the field;
  Greece, in her native fortitude elate,
  With Jove averse, had turn'd the scale of fate:
  But Phoebus urged Cneas to the fight;
  He seem'd like aged Periphas to sight:
  (A herald in Anchises' love grown old,
  Revered for prudence, and with prudence bold.)

  Thus he--"What methods yet, O chief! remain,
  To save your Troy, though heaven its fall ordain?
  There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care,
  By valour, numbers, and by arts of war,
  Have forced the powers to spare a sinking state,
  And gain'd at length the glorious odds of fate:
  But you, when fortune smiles, when Jove declares
  His partial favour, and assists your wars,
  Your shameful efforts 'gainst yourselves employ,
  And force the unwilling god to ruin Troy."

  Cneas through the form assumed descries
  The power conceal'd, and thus to Hector cries:
  "Oh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,
  We seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
  A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,
  And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms."

  He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:
  The bold example all his hosts pursue.
  Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
  In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
  Who view'd his fall, and, grieving at the chance,
  Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;
  The whirling lance, with vigorous force address'd,
  Descends, and pants in Apisaon's breast;
  From rich Paeonia's vales the warrior came,
  Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
  Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,
  And rush'd to combat, but he rush'd in vain:
  Indissolubly firm, around the dead,
  Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread,
  And hemm'd with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,
  A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
  Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,
  And in an orb contracts the crowded war,
  Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,
  And stands the centre and the soul of all:
  Fix'd on the spot they war, and wounded, wound
  A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:
  On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled,
  And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.

  Greece, in close order, and collected might,
  Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight;
  Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,
  And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
  In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;
  The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host
  Seem'd as extinct: day ravish'd from their eyes,
  And all heaven's splendours blotted from the skies.
  Such o'er Patroclus' body hung the night,
  The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;
  Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread,
  No vapour rested on the mountain's head,
  The golden sun pour'd forth a stronger ray,
  And all the broad expansion flamed with day.
  Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight,
  And here and there their scatter'd arrows light:
  But death and darkness o'er the carcase spread,
  There burn'd the war, and there the mighty bled.

  Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear,
  (Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear,
  And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command,
  When from the ships he sent the Pylian band.
  The youthful brothers thus for fame contend,
  Nor knew the fortune of Achilles' friend;
  In thought they view'd him still, with martial joy,
  Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.

  But round the corse the heroes pant for breath,
  And thick and heavy grows the work of death:
  O'erlabour'd now, with dust, and sweat, and gore,
  Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered o'er;
  Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise,
  And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.
  As when a slaughter'd bull's yet reeking hide,
  Strain'd with full force, and tugg'd from side to side,
  The brawny curriers stretch; and labour o'er
  The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore:
  So tugging round the corse both armies stood;
  The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood;
  While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ,
  Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy.
  Not Pallas' self, her breast when fury warms,
  Nor he whose anger sets the world in arms,
  Could blame this scene; such rage, such horror reign'd;
  Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordain'd.

  Achilles in his ships at distance lay,
  Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day;
  He, yet unconscious of Patroclus' fall,
  In dust extended under Ilion's wall,
  Expects him glorious from the conquered plain,
  And for his wish'd return prepares in vain;
  Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend
  Was more than heaven had destined to his friend.
  Perhaps to him: this Thetis had reveal'd;
  The rest, in pity to her son, conceal'd.

  Still raged the conflict round the hero dead,
  And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled.
  "Cursed be the man (even private Greeks would say)
  Who dares desert this well-disputed day!
  First may the cleaving earth before our eyes
  Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice;
  First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast
  We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!"

  Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said,
  "Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!"

  Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise,
  And shake the brazen concave of the skies.

  Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,
  The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood:
  Their godlike master slain before their eyes,
  They wept, and shared in human miseries.(248)
  In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,
  Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;
  Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go,
  Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:
  Still as a tombstone, never to be moved,
  On some good man or woman unreproved
  Lays its eternal weight; or fix'd, as stands
  A marble courser by the sculptor's hands,
  Placed on the hero's grave. Along their face
  The big round drops coursed down with silent pace,
  Conglobing on the dust. Their manes, that late
  Circled their arched necks, and waved in state,
  Trail'd on the dust beneath the yoke were spread,
  And prone to earth was hung their languid head:
  Nor Jove disdain'd to cast a pitying look,
  While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke:

  "Unhappy coursers of immortal strain,
  Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain;
  Did we your race on mortal man bestow,
  Only, alas! to share in mortal woe?
  For ah! what is there of inferior birth,
  That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
  What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
  Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
  A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
  For not by you shall Priam's son be borne
  High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
  He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
  Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
  Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
  Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
  Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
  For yet 'tis given to Troy to ravage o'er
  The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
  The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
  With sacred darkness shades the face of all."

  He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
  Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
  From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
  The kindling chariot through the parted war:
  So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
  Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
  From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
  And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
  Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
  Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
  Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress'd,
  Approach'd the chariot, and the chief address'd:

  "What god provokes thee rashly thus to dare,
  Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
  Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields
  Achilles' arms triumphant in the fields."

  "In happy time (the charioteer replies)
  The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes;
  No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains,
  Or holds their fury in suspended reins:
  Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame,
  But now Patroclus is an empty name!
  To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign
  The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine."

  He said. Alcimedon, with active heat,
  Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
  His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,
  And call'd Cneas fighting near his side.

  "Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,
  Achilles' car, deserted of its lord!
  The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,
  Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
  Can such opponents stand when we assail?
  Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail."

  The son of Venus to the counsel yields;
  Then o'er their backs they spread their solid shields:
  With brass refulgent the broad surface shined,
  And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.
  Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds;
  Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds:
  In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn,
  In vain advance! not fated to return.

  Unmov'd, Automedon attends the fight,
  Implores the Eternal, and collects his might.
  Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind:
  "Oh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
  Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow,
  For hard the fight, determined is the foe;
  'Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize,
  War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies."

  Then through the field he sends his voice aloud,
  And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,
  With great Atrides. "Hither turn, (he said,)
  Turn where distress demands immediate aid;
  The dead, encircled by his friends, forego,
  And save the living from a fiercer foe.
  Unhelp'd we stand, unequal to engage
  The force of Hector, and Cneas' rage:
  Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove
  Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove."

  He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung,
  Which pass'd the shield of Aretus the young:
  It pierced his belt, emboss'd with curious art,
  Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
  As when a ponderous axe, descending full,
  Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:(249)
  Struck 'twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,
  Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground:
  Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,
  And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.

  Now at Automedon the Trojan foe
  Discharged his lance; the meditated blow,
  Stooping, he shunn'd; the javelin idly fled,
  And hiss'd innoxious o'er the hero's head;
  Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear
  In long vibrations spent its fury there.
  With clashing falchions now the chiefs had closed,
  But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed;
  Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,
  But left their slain companion in his blood:
  His arms Automedon divests, and cries,
  "Accept, Patroclus, this mean sacrifice:
  Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid,
  Poor as it is, some offering to thy shade."

  So looks the lion o'er a mangled boar,
  All grim with rage, and horrible with gore;
  High on the chariot at one bound he sprung,
  And o'er his seat the bloody trophies hung.

  And now Minerva from the realms of air
  Descends impetuous, and renews the war;
  For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid,
  The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.
  As when high Jove denouncing future woe,
  O'er the dark clouds extends his purple bow,
  (In sign of tempests from the troubled air,
  Or from the rage of man, destructive war,)
  The drooping cattle dread the impending skies,
  And from his half-till'd field the labourer flies:
  In such a form the goddess round her drew
  A livid cloud, and to the battle flew.
  Assuming Phoenix' shape on earth she falls,
  And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls:
  "And lies Achilles' friend, beloved by all,
  A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall?
  What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell,
  To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!"
  "O chief, O father! (Atreus' son replies)
  O full of days! by long experience wise!
  What more desires my soul, than here unmoved
  To guard the body of the man I loved?
  Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear
  This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!
  But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread,
  And Jove's own glories blaze around his head!"

  Pleased to be first of all the powers address'd,
  She breathes new vigour in her hero's breast,
  And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite,
  Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight.
  So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o'er),
  Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
  (Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
  Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
  Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
  And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

  There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
  Aetion's son, and Podes was his name:
  With riches honour'd, and with courage bless'd,
  By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
  Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
  And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
  Sudden at Hector's side Apollo stood,
  Like Phaenops, Asius' son, appear'd the god;
  (Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
  In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

  "Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
  What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
  Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
  A chief once thought no terror of the field?
  Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
  He bears victorious, while our army flies:
  By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
  The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!"
  This heard, o'er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
  Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

  But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
  That shaded Ide and all the subject field
  Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
  Involved the mount; the thunder roar'd aloud;
  The affrighted hills from their foundations nod,
  And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:
  At one regard of his all-seeing eye
  The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors fly.

  Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;
  For as the brave Boeotian turn'd his head
  To face the foe, Polydamas drew near,
  And razed his shoulder with a shorten'd spear:
  By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,
  Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain,
  Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.

  As Hector follow'd, Idomen address'd
  The flaming javelin to his manly breast;
  The brittle point before his corslet yields;
  Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields:
  High on his chariots the Cretan stood,
  The son of Priam whirl'd the massive wood.
  But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear
  Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer
  Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name,
  Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame.
  On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,
  Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe,
  But the brave squire the ready coursers brought,
  And with his life his master's safety bought.
  Between his cheek and ear the weapon went,
  The teeth it shatter'd, and the tongue it rent.
  Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain;
  His dying hand forgets the falling rein:
  This Merion reaches, bending from the car,
  And urges to desert the hopeless war:
  Idomeneus consents; the lash applies;
  And the swift chariot to the navy flies.

  Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried,
  And conquest shifting to the Trojan side,
  Turn'd by the hand of Jove. Then thus begun,
  To Atreus's seed, the godlike Telamon:

  "Alas! who sees not Jove's almighty hand
  Transfers the glory to the Trojan band?
  Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart,
  He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart:
  Not so our spears; incessant though they rain,
  He suffers every lance to fall in vain.
  Deserted of the god, yet let us try
  What human strength and prudence can supply;
  If yet this honour'd corse, in triumph borne,
  May glad the fleets that hope not our return,
  Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates,
  And still hear Hector thundering at their gates.
  Some hero too must be despatch'd to bear
  The mournful message to Pelides' ear;
  For sure he knows not, distant on the shore,
  His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
  But such a chief I spy not through the host:
  The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost
  In general darkness--Lord of earth and air!
  Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer:
  Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
  Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
  If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
  But let us perish in the face of day!"

  With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer
  The god relenting clear'd the clouded air;
  Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;
  The blaze of armour flash'd against the day.
  "Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;
  If yet Antilochus survives the fight,
  Let him to great Achilles' ear convey
  The fatal news"--Atrides hastes away.

  So turns the lion from the nightly fold,
  Though high in courage, and with hunger bold,
  Long gall'd by herdsmen, and long vex'd by hounds,
  Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
  The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
  And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
  Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
  Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
  So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
  With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
  The foe, he fear'd, might yet Patroclus gain,
  And much admonish'd, much adjured his train:

  "O guard these relics to your charge consign'd,
  And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
  How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
  The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
  He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
  In death a hero, as in life a friend!"

  So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
  And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
  As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
  Of all that wings the mid aerial sky,
  The sacred eagle, from his walks above
  Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
  Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
  Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
  Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
  Pass'd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
  Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
  Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

  To him the king: "Beloved of Jove! draw near,
  For sadder tidings never touch'd thy ear;
  Thy eyes have witness'd what a fatal turn!
  How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
  This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore
  Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
  Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell
  The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:
  He too may haste the naked corse to gain:
  The arms are Hector's, who despoil'd the slain."

  The youthful warrior heard with silent woe,
  From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:
  Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say
  What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
  To brave Laodocus his arms he flung,
  Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along;
  Then ran the mournful message to impart,
  With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart.

  Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands
  (Though sore distress'd) to aid the Pylian bands;
  But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain;
  Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
  "Gone is Antilochus (the hero said);
  But hope not, warriors, for Achilles' aid:
  Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his woe,
  Unarm'd, he fights not with the Trojan foe.
  'Tis in our hands alone our hopes remain,
  'Tis our own vigour must the dead regain,
  And save ourselves, while with impetuous hate
  Troy pours along, and this way rolls our fate."

  "'Tis well (said Ajax), be it then thy care,
  With Merion's aid, the weighty corse to rear;
  Myself, and my bold brother will sustain
  The shock of Hector and his charging train:
  Nor fear we armies, fighting side by side;
  What Troy can dare, we have already tried,
  Have tried it, and have stood." The hero said.
  High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
  A general clamour rises at the sight:
  Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the fight.
  Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood,
  With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood,
  Voracious hounds, that many a length before
  Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar;
  But if the savage turns his glaring eye,
  They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
  Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
  Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:
  But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield,
  All pale they tremble and forsake the field.

  While thus aloft the hero's corse they bear,
  Behind them rages all the storm of war:
  Confusion, tumult, horror, o'er the throng
  Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along:
  Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire
  To whelm some city under waves of fire;
  Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,
  Now crack the blazing temples of the gods;
  The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls,
  And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.
  The heroes sweat beneath their honour'd load:
  As when two mules, along the rugged road,
  From the steep mountain with exerted strength
  Drag some vast beam, or mast's unwieldy length;
  Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,
  The enormous timber lumbering down the hill:
  So these--Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands,
  And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
  Thus when a river swell'd with sudden rains
  Spreads his broad waters o'er the level plains,
  Some interposing hill the stream divides.
  And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
  Still close they follow, close the rear engage;
  Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:
  While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains,
  Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,
  That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung
  High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
  So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,
  Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry:
  Within, without the trench, and all the way,
  Strow'd in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay;
  Such horror Jove impress'd! yet still proceeds
  The work of death, and still the battle bleeds.

               [Illustration: VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.]

                       VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.





BOOK XVIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN.

The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by Antilochus.
Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea- nymphs to
comfort him. The speeches of the mother and son on this occasion. Iris
appears to Achilles by the command of Juno, and orders him to show himself
at the head of the intrenchments. The sight of him turns the fortunes of
the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off by the Greeks. The
Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas disagree in their
opinions: but the advice of the former prevails, to remain encamped in the
field. The grief of Achilles over the body of Patroclus.

Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan to obtain new arms for her son. The
description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that noble one
of the shield of Achilles.

The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night ensuing, take
up this book: the scene is at Achilles' tent on the sea-shore, from whence
it changes to the palace of Vulcan.

  Thus like the rage of fire the combat burns,(250)
  And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
  Meanwhile, where Hellespont's broad waters flow,
  Stood Nestor's son, the messenger of woe:
  There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails,
  On hoisted yards extended to the gales;
  Pensive he sat; for all that fate design'd
  Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind.
  Thus to his soul he said: "Ah! what constrains
  The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
  Is this the day, which heaven so long ago
  Ordain'd, to sink me with the weight of woe?
  (So Thetis warn'd;) when by a Trojan hand
  The bravest of the Myrmidonian band
  Should lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree;
  Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he!
  In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain,
  And warn'd to shun Hectorean force in vain!"

  Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears,
  And tells the melancholy tale with tears.
  "Sad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear;
  And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!
  Dead is Patroclus! For his corse they fight;
  His naked corse: his arms are Hector's right."

  A sudden horror shot through all the chief,
  And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief;
  Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread
  The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head;
  His purple garments, and his golden hairs,
  Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears;
  On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,
  And roll'd and grovell'd, as to earth he grew.
  The virgin captives, with disorder'd charms,
  (Won by his own, or by Patroclus' arms,)
  Rush'd from their tents with cries; and gathering round,
  Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground:
  While Nestor's son sustains a manlier part,
  And mourns the warrior with a warrior's heart;
  Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,
  And oft prevents the meditated blow.

  Far in the deep abysses of the main,(251)
  With hoary Nereus, and the watery train,
  The mother-goddess from her crystal throne
  Heard his loud cries, and answer'd groan for groan.
  The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,
  And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
  Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),
  Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came:
  Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
  And the blue languish of soft Alia's eye.
  Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
  Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
  Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
  Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
  Next Callianira, Callianassa show
  Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow,
  And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides:
  Iaera now the verdant wave divides:
  Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head,
  Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;
  These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
  Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;
  And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
  And Amatheia with her amber hair.
  All these, and all that deep in ocean held
  Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill'd;
  Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe,
  Till Thetis' sorrows thus began to flow:

  "Hear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
  How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
  How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
  How more than wretched in the immortal state!
  Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came,
  The bravest far that ever bore the name;
  Like some fair olive, by my careful hand
  He grew, he flourish'd and adorn'd the land
  To Troy I sent him: but the fates ordain
  He never, never must return again.
  So short a space the light of heaven to view,
  So short, alas! and fill'd with anguish too!
  Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
  I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
  I go at least to bear a tender part,
  And mourn my loved-one with a mother's heart."

  She said, and left the caverns of the main,
  All bathed in tears; the melancholy train
  Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,
  While the long pomp the silver wave divides.
  Approaching now, they touch'd the Trojan land;
  Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
  The immortal mother, standing close beside
  Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied;
  Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,
  And thus the silver-footed dame began:

  "Why mourns my son? thy late preferr'd request
  The god has granted, and the Greeks distress'd:
  Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share,
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He, deeply groaning--"To this cureless grief,
  Not even the Thunderer's favour brings relief.
  Patroclus--Ah!--say, goddess, can I boast
  A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost;
  Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,
  Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
  Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow'd
  On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
  Cursed be that day, when all the powers above
  Thy charms submitted to a mortal love:
  O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,
  Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign:
  And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
  A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
  Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb
  Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come.
  For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,
  New woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
  'Tis not in fate the alternate now to give;
  Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
  Let me revenge it on proud Hector's heart,
  Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;
  On these conditions will I breathe: till then,
  I blush to walk among the race of men."

  A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed:
  "Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
  When Hector falls, thou diest."--"Let Hector die,
  And let me fall! (Achilles made reply)
  Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
  He fell, and falling, wish'd my aid in vain.
  Ah then, since from this miserable day
  I cast all hope of my return away;
  Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand
  The fate of Hector from Achilles' hand;
  Since here, for brutal courage far renown'd,
  I live an idle burden to the ground,
  (Others in council famed for nobler skill,
  More useful to preserve, than I to kill,)
  Let me--But oh! ye gracious powers above!
  Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove:
  Far, far too dear to every mortal breast,
  Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste:
  Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind
  From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind.
  Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate;
  'Tis past--I quell it; I resign to fate.
  Yes--I will meet the murderer of my friend;
  Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end.
  The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun:
  The great Alcides, Jove's unequall'd son,
  To Juno's hate, at length resign'd his breath,
  And sunk the victim of all-conquering death.
  So shall Achilles fall! stretch'd pale and dead,
  No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!
  Let me, this instant, rush into the fields,
  And reap what glory life's short harvest yields.
  Shall I not force some widow'd dame to tear
  With frantic hands her long dishevell'd hair?
  Shall I not force her breast to heave with sighs,
  And the soft tears to trickle from her eyes?
  Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charms--
  In vain you hold me--Hence! my arms! my arms!--
  Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide,
  That all shall know Achilles swells the tide."

  "My son (coerulean Thetis made reply,
  To fate submitting with a secret sigh,)
  The host to succour, and thy friends to save,
  Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave.
  But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains?
  Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains.
  Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
  But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
  Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
  Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day,
  Charged with refulgent arms (a glorious load),
  Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god."

  Then turning to the daughters of the main,
  The goddess thus dismiss'd her azure train:

  "Ye sister Nereids! to your deeps descend;
  Haste, and our father's sacred seat attend;
  I go to find the architect divine,
  Where vast Olympus' starry summits shine:
  So tell our hoary sire"--This charge she gave:
  The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the wave:
  Thetis once more ascends the bless'd abodes,
  And treads the brazen threshold of the gods.

   [Illustration: THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.]

           THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA.


  And now the Greeks from furious Hector's force,
  Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course;
  Nor yet their chiefs Patroclus' body bore
  Safe through the tempest to the tented shore.
  The horse, the foot, with equal fury join'd,
  Pour'd on the rear, and thunder'd close behind:
  And like a flame through fields of ripen'd corn,
  The rage of Hector o'er the ranks was borne.
  Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew;
  Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:
  As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain;
  But check'd, he turns; repuls'd, attacks again.
  With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,
  Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires:
  So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,
  The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
  Even yet Patroclus had he borne away,
  And all the glories of the extended day,
  Had not high Juno from the realms of air,
  Secret, despatch'd her trusty messenger.
  The various goddess of the showery bow,
  Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below;
  To great Achilles at his ships she came,
  And thus began the many-colour'd dame:

  "Rise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!
  Assist the combat, and Patroclus save:
  For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread,
  And fall by mutual wounds around the dead.
  To drag him back to Troy the foe contends:
  Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends:
  A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie,
  And marks the place to fix his head on high.
  Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame)
  Thy friend's disgrace, thy own eternal shame!"

  "Who sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?"
  Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies:

  "I come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove,
  The immortal empress of the realms above;
  Unknown to him who sits remote on high,
  Unknown to all the synod of the sky."
  "Thou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warm'd);
  Arms I have none, and can I fight unarm'd?
  Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,
  Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day
  Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield,
  Except the mighty Telamonian shield?
  That, in my friend's defence, has Ajax spread,
  While his strong lance around him heaps the dead:
  The gallant chief defends Menoetius' son,
  And does what his Achilles should have done."

  "Thy want of arms (said Iris) well we know;
  But though unarm'd, yet clad in terrors, go!
  Let but Achilles o'er yon trench appear,
  Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;
  Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye
  Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly."

  She spoke, and pass'd in air. The hero rose:
  Her aegis Pallas o'er his shoulder throws;
  Around his brows a golden cloud she spread;
  A stream of glory flamed above his head.
  As when from some beleaguer'd town arise
  The smokes, high curling to the shaded skies;
  (Seen from some island, o'er the main afar,
  When men distress'd hang out the sign of war;)
  Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays,
  Thick on the hills the flaming beacons blaze;
  With long-projected beams the seas are bright,
  And heaven's high arch reflects the ruddy light:
  So from Achilles' head the splendours rise,
  Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.
  Forth march'd the chief, and distant from the crowd,
  High on the rampart raised his voice aloud;
  With her own shout Minerva swells the sound;
  Troy starts astonish'd, and the shores rebound.
  As the loud trumpet's brazen mouth from far
  With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war,
  Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,
  And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply;
  So high his brazen voice the hero rear'd:
  Hosts dropp'd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
  And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
  And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
  Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
  And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
  Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
  And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
  Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush'd
  On their own spears, by their own chariots crush'd:
  While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
  The long-contended carcase of the slain.

  A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
  Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
  But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
  Pours unavailing sorrows o'er the dead,
  Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
  He sent refulgent to the field of war;
  (Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
  Stretch'd forth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound.

  Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
  In ocean's waves the unwilling light of day
  Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,
  And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
  The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
  Their steeds unharness'd from the weary car)
  A sudden council call'd: each chief appear'd
  In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear'd.
  'Twas now no season for prolong'd debate;
  They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
  Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
  Skill'd to discern the future by the past,
  The son of Panthus, thus express'd his fears
  (The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
  The self-same night to both a being gave,
  One wise in council, one in action brave):

             [Illustration: JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.]

                     JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.


  "In free debate, my friends, your sentence speak;
  For me, I move, before the morning break,
  To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post,
  Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.
  I deem'd not Greece so dreadful, while engaged
  In mutual feuds her king and hero raged;
  Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail
  We boldly camp'd beside a thousand sail.
  I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind
  Not long continues to the shores confined,
  Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray
  Contending nations won and lost the day;
  For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife,
  And the hard contest not for fame, but life.
  Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night
  Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight.
  If but the morrow's sun behold us here,
  That arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear;
  And hearts that now disdain, shall leap with joy,
  If heaven permit them then to enter Troy.
  Let not my fatal prophecy be true,
  Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
  Whatever be our fate, yet let us try
  What force of thought and reason can supply;
  Let us on counsel for our guard depend;
  The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.
  When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers,
  Array'd in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
  Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls,
  Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls,
  Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain,
  Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again:
  So may his rage be tired, and labour'd down!
  And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town."

  "Return! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain)
  What! coop whole armies in our walls again?
  Was't not enough, ye valiant warriors, say,
  Nine years imprison'd in those towers ye lay?
  Wide o'er the world was Ilion famed of old
  For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold:
  But while inglorious in her walls we stay'd,
  Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decay'd;
  The Phrygians now her scatter'd spoils enjoy,
  And proud Maeonia wastes the fruits of Troy.
  Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls,
  And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls,
  Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?
  Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his flight.
  To better counsel then attention lend;
  Take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
  If there be one whose riches cost him care,
  Forth let him bring them for the troops to share;
  'Tis better generously bestow'd on those,
  Than left the plunder of our country's foes.
  Soon as the morn the purple orient warms,
  Fierce on yon navy will we pour our arms.
  If great Achilles rise in all his might,
  His be the danger: I shall stand the fight.
  Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give;
  And live he glorious, whosoe'er shall live!
  Mars is our common lord, alike to all;
  And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall."

  The shouting host in loud applauses join'd;
  So Pallas robb'd the many of their mind;
  To their own sense condemn'd, and left to choose
  The worst advice, the better to refuse.

  While the long night extends her sable reign,
  Around Patroclus mourn'd the Grecian train.
  Stern in superior grief Pelides stood;
  Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood,
  Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start
  The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart.
  The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his young;
  When the grim savage, to his rifled den
  Too late returning, snuffs the track of men,
  And o'er the vales and o'er the forest bounds;
  His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.
  So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents
  To all his Myrmidons his loud laments.

  "In what vain promise, gods! did I engage,
  When to console Menoetius' feeble age,
  I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore,
  Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntia's shore?(252)
  But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain,
  The long, long views of poor designing man!
  One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike,
  And Troy's black sands must drink our blood alike:
  Me too a wretched mother shall deplore,
  An aged father never see me more!
  Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,
  Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
  Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid,
  Shall Hector's head be offer'd to thy shade;
  That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine;
  And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line,
  Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire;
  Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.
  Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely press'd,
  Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!
  While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay,
  Weep all the night and murmur all the day:
  Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,
  Our swords kept time, and conquer'd side by side."

  He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round
  Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honour'd wound.
  A massy caldron of stupendous frame
  They brought, and placed it o'er the rising flame:
  Then heap'd the lighted wood; the flame divides
  Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:
  In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream;
  The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
  The body then they bathe with pious toil,
  Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil,
  High on a bed of state extended laid,
  And decent cover'd with a linen shade;
  Last o'er the dead the milk-white veil they threw;
  That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew.

  Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above,
  (His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
  "At last thy will prevails: great Peleus' son
  Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
  Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
  And thou the mother of that martial line?"

  "What words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
  While anger flash'd from her majestic eyes)
  Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
  And such success mere human wit attend:
  And shall not I, the second power above,
  Heaven's queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
  Say, shall not I one nation's fate command,
  Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?"

                         [Illustration: TRIPOD.]

                                 TRIPOD.


  So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
  Reach'd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
  High-eminent amid the works divine,
  Where heaven's far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
  There the lame architect the goddess found,
  Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
  While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
  And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
  That day no common task his labour claim'd:
  Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
  That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
  (Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll'd
  From place to place, around the bless'd abodes
  Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
  For their fair handles now, o'erwrought with flowers,
  In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
  Just as responsive to his thought the frame
  Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
  Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
  (With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
  Observed her entering; her soft hand she press'd,
  And, smiling, thus the watery queen address'd:

  "What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
  All hail, and welcome! whatsoe'er the cause;
  Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
  Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower."

     [Illustration: THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.]

             THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.


  High on a throne, with stars of silver graced,
  And various artifice, the queen she placed;
  A footstool at her feet: then calling, said,
  "Vulcan, draw near, 'tis Thetis asks your aid."
  "Thetis (replied the god) our powers may claim,
  An ever-dear, an ever-honour'd name!
  When my proud mother hurl'd me from the sky,
  (My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,)
  She, and Eurynome, my griefs redress'd,
  And soft received me on their silver breast.
  Even then these arts employ'd my infant thought:
  Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought.
  Nine years kept secret in the dark abode,
  Secure I lay, conceal'd from man and god:
  Deep in a cavern'd rock my days were led;
  The rushing ocean murmur'd o'er my head.
  Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say,
  For such desert what service can I pay?
  Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share
  The genial rites, and hospitable fare;
  While I the labours of the forge forego,
  And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow."

  Then from his anvil the lame artist rose;
  Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes,
  And stills the bellows, and (in order laid)
  Locks in their chests his instruments of trade.
  Then with a sponge the sooty workman dress'd
  His brawny arms embrown'd, and hairy breast.
  With his huge sceptre graced, and red attire,
  Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire:
  The monarch's steps two female forms uphold,
  That moved and breathed in animated gold;
  To whom was voice, and sense, and science given
  Of works divine (such wonders are in heaven!)
  On these supported, with unequal gait,
  He reach'd the throne where pensive Thetis sate;
  There placed beside her on the shining frame,
  He thus address'd the silver-footed dame:

  "Thee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls
  (So long a stranger) to these honour'd walls?
  'Tis thine, fair Thetis, the command to lay,
  And Vulcan's joy and duty to obey."

           [Illustration: VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.]

                   VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.


  To whom the mournful mother thus replies:
  (The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:)
  "O Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine
  So pierced with sorrows, so o'erwhelm'd as mine?
  Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare
  For Thetis only such a weight of care?
  I, only I, of all the watery race
  By force subjected to a man's embrace,
  Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays
  The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
  Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
  The bravest sure that ever bore the name;
  Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand
  He grew, he flourish'd, and he graced the land:
  To Troy I sent him! but his native shore
  Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
  (Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;)
  Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!
  Robb'd of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave,
  The king of nations forced his royal slave:
  For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress'd
  Required his arm, he sorrow'd unredress'd.
  Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;
  In vain--he arms not, but permits his friend
  His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:
  He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
  Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the name)
  At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
  But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:
  Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son,
  And to the field in martial pomp restore,
  To shine with glory, till he shines no more!"

  To her the artist-god: "Thy griefs resign,
  Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
  O could I hide him from the Fates, as well,
  Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
  As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
  Of wondering ages, and the world's amaze!"

  Thus having said, the father of the fires
  To the black labours of his forge retires.
  Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turn'd
  Their iron mouths; and where the furnace burn'd,
  Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires,
  And twenty forges catch at once the fires;
  Just as the god directs, now loud, now low,
  They raise a tempest, or they gently blow;
  In hissing flames huge silver bars are roll'd,
  And stubborn brass, and tin, and solid gold;
  Before, deep fix'd, the eternal anvils stand;
  The ponderous hammer loads his better hand,
  His left with tongs turns the vex'd metal round,
  And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound.

  Then first he form'd the immense and solid shield;
  Rich various artifice emblazed the field;
  Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;(253)
  A silver chain suspends the massy round;
  Five ample plates the broad expanse compose,
  And godlike labours on the surface rose.
  There shone the image of the master-mind:
  There earth, there heaven, there ocean he design'd;
  The unwearied sun, the moon completely round;
  The starry lights that heaven's high convex crown'd;
  The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern team;
  And great Orion's more refulgent beam;
  To which, around the axle of the sky,
  The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye,
  Still shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
  Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.

  Two cities radiant on the shield appear,
  The image one of peace, and one of war.
  Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight,
  And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite;
  Along the street the new-made brides are led,
  With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed:
  The youthful dancers in a circle bound
  To the soft flute, and cithern's silver sound:
  Through the fair streets the matrons in a row
  Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show.

  There in the forum swarm a numerous train;
  The subject of debate, a townsman slain:
  One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied,
  And bade the public and the laws decide:
  The witness is produced on either hand:
  For this, or that, the partial people stand:
  The appointed heralds still the noisy bands,
  And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands:
  On seats of stone, within the sacred place,(254)
  The reverend elders nodded o'er the case;
  Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
  And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke
  Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
  The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

  Another part (a prospect differing far)(255)
  Glow'd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
  Two mighty hosts a leaguer'd town embrace,
  And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
  Meantime the townsmen, arm'd with silent care,
  A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
  Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
  Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
  They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
  Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
  And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
  August, divine, superior by the head!
  A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
  Cover'd with shields, beside a silver flood.
  Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
  If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
  Soon the white flocks proceeded o'er the plains,
  And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
  Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
  Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
  In arms the glittering squadron rising round
  Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground;
  Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains,
  And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
  The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear;
  They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,
  They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood;
  The waving silver seem'd to blush with blood.
  There Tumult, there Contention stood confess'd;
  One rear'd a dagger at a captive's breast;
  One held a living foe, that freshly bled
  With new-made wounds; another dragg'd a dead;
  Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:
  Fate stalk'd amidst them, grim with human gore.
  And the whole war came out, and met the eye;
  And each bold figure seem'd to live or die.

  A field deep furrow'd next the god design'd,(256)
  The third time labour'd by the sweating hind;
  The shining shares full many ploughmen guide,
  And turn their crooked yokes on every side.
  Still as at either end they wheel around,
  The master meets them with his goblet crown'd;
  The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil,
  Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil:
  Behind, the rising earth in ridges roll'd;
  And sable look'd, though form'd of molten gold.

  Another field rose high with waving grain;
  With bended sickles stand the reaper train:
  Here stretched in ranks the levell'd swarths are found,
  Sheaves heap'd on sheaves here thicken up the ground.
  With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands;
  The gatherers follow, and collect in bands;
  And last the children, in whose arms are borne
  (Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.
  The rustic monarch of the field descries,
  With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
  A ready banquet on the turf is laid,
  Beneath an ample oak's expanded shade.
  The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare;
  The reaper's due repast, the woman's care.

  Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines,
  Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines;
  A deeper dye the dangling clusters show,
  And curl'd on silver props, in order glow:
  A darker metal mix'd intrench'd the place;
  And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
  To this, one pathway gently winding leads,
  Where march a train with baskets on their heads,
  (Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear
  The purple product of the autumnal year.
  To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,
  Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings;
  In measured dance behind him move the train,
  Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.

  Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold,
  Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,
  And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores
  A rapid torrent through the rushes roars:
  Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand,
  And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
  Two lions rushing from the wood appear'd;
  And seized a bull, the master of the herd:
  He roar'd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
  They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
  The dogs (oft cheer'd in vain) desert the prey,
  Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.

  Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads
  Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads,
  And stalls, and folds, and scatter'd cots between;
  And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.

  A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen
  In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,
  Form'd by Daedalean art; a comely band
  Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
  The maids in soft simars of linen dress'd;
  The youths all graceful in the glossy vest:
  Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll'd;
  Of these the sides adorn'd with swords of gold,
  That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
  Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
  With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways,
  Confusedly regular, the moving maze:
  Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
  And undistinguish'd blend the flying ring:
  So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle toss'd,
  And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.
  The gazing multitudes admire around:
  Two active tumblers in the centre bound;
  Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend:
  And general songs the sprightly revel end.

  Thus the broad shield complete the artist crown'd
  With his last hand, and pour'd the ocean round:
  In living silver seem'd the waves to roll,
  And beat the buckler's verge, and bound the whole.

  This done, whate'er a warrior's use requires
  He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires,
  The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impress'd
  With various sculpture, and the golden crest.
  At Thetis' feet the finished labour lay:
  She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way,
  Swift from Olympus' snowy summit flies,
  And bears the blazing present through the skies.(257)





BOOK XIX.


ARGUMENT.

THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.

Thetis brings to her son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves the body
of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the army, to
declare his resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are solemnly
reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that occasion.
Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from the battle
till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice of Ulysses. The
presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, where Briseis laments over
the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinately refuses all repast, and gives
himself up to lamentations for his friend. Minerva descends to strengthen
him, by the order of Jupiter. He arms for the fight: his appearance
described. He addresses himself to his horses, and reproaches them with
the death of Patroclus. One of them is miraculously endued with voice, and
inspired to prophesy his fate: but the hero, not astonished by that
prodigy, rushes with fury to the combat.

The thirteenth day. The scene is on the sea-shore.

  Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head
  Above the waves, that blush'd with early red,
  (With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)
  The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears
  Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears
  Stretch'd o'er Patroclus' corse; while all the rest
  Their sovereign's sorrows in their own express'd.
  A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,
  And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

  "Suppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know
  It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow;
  Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow'd,
  Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god."

  Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
  Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
  Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
  And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
  Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
  And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
  From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
  And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
  He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
  On all the immortal artist had design'd.

  "Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
  With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
  Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
  But ah! the relics of my slaughter'd friend!
  In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
  Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?"

  "That unavailing care be laid aside,
  (The azure goddess to her son replied,)
  Whole years untouch'd, uninjured shall remain,
  Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
  But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
  Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
  Then uncontroll'd in boundless war engage,
  And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!"

         [Illustration: THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.]

                 THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.


  Then in the nostrils of the slain she pour'd
  Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia shower'd
  O'er all the corse. The flies forbid their prey,
  Untouch'd it rests, and sacred from decay.
  Achilles to the strand obedient went:
  The shores resounded with the voice he sent.
  The heroes heard, and all the naval train
  That tend the ships, or guide them o'er the main,
  Alarm'd, transported, at the well-known sound,
  Frequent and full, the great assembly crown'd;
  Studious to see the terror of the plain,
  Long lost to battle, shine in arms again.
  Tydides and Ulysses first appear,
  Lame with their wounds, and leaning on the spear;
  These on the sacred seats of council placed,
  The king of men, Atrides, came the last:
  He too sore wounded by Agenor's son.
  Achilles (rising in the midst) begun:

  "O monarch! better far had been the fate
  Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state,
  If (ere the day when by mad passion sway'd,
  Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid)
  Preventing Dian had despatch'd her dart,
  And shot the shining mischief to the heart!
  Then many a hero had not press'd the shore,
  Nor Troy's glad fields been fatten'd with our gore.
  Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail,
  And sad posterity repeat the tale.
  But this, no more the subject of debate,
  Is past, forgotten, and resign'd to fate.
  Why should, alas, a mortal man, as I,
  Burn with a fury that can never die?
  Here then my anger ends: let war succeed,
  And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.
  Now call the hosts, and try if in our sight
  Troy yet shall dare to camp a second night!
  I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows,
  Shall 'scape with transport, and with joy repose."

  He said: his finish'd wrath with loud acclaim
  The Greeks accept, and shout Pelides' name.
  When thus, not rising from his lofty throne,
  In state unmoved, the king of men begun:

  "Hear me, ye sons of Greece! with silence hear!
  And grant your monarch an impartial ear:
  Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend,
  And let your rash, injurious clamours end:
  Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause,
  Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.
  Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate:
  Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,
  With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day
  When from Achilles' arms I forced the prey.
  What then could I against the will of heaven?
  Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven;
  She, Jove's dread daughter, fated to infest
  The race of mortals, enter'd in my breast.
  Not on the ground that haughty fury treads,
  But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads
  Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes
  Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes!
  Of old, she stalk'd amid the bright abodes;
  And Jove himself, the sire of men and gods,
  The world's great ruler, felt her venom'd dart;
  Deceived by Juno's wiles, and female art:
  For when Alcmena's nine long months were run,
  And Jove expected his immortal son,
  To gods and goddesses the unruly joy
  He show'd, and vaunted of his matchless boy:
  'From us, (he said) this day an infant springs,
  Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.'
  Saturnia ask'd an oath, to vouch the truth,
  And fix dominion on the favour'd youth.
  The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud,
  Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
  The joyful goddess, from Olympus' height,
  Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight:
  Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelus's wife;
  She push'd her lingering infant into life:
  Her charms Alcmena's coming labours stay,
  And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
  Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;
  'A youth (said she) of Jove's immortal kind
  Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,
  And claims thy promise to be king of kings.'
  Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged;
  Stung to the soul, he sorrow'd, and he raged.
  From his ambrosial head, where perch'd she sate,
  He snatch'd the fury-goddess of debate,
  The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
  The immortal seats should ne'er behold her more;
  And whirl'd her headlong down, for ever driven
  From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
  Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
  Ordain'd with man's contentious race to dwell.
  Full oft the god his son's hard toils bemoan'd,
  Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groan'd.(258)
  Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
  While raging Hector heap'd our camps with dead.
  What can the errors of my rage atone?
  My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
  This instant from the navy shall be sent
  Whate'er Ulysses promised at thy tent:
  But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
  Resume thy arms, and shine again in war."

  " O king of nations! whose superior sway
  (Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
  To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
  To us, 'tis equal: all we ask is war.
  While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
  The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
  Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
  The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
  With emulation, what I act survey,
  And learn from thence the business of the day.

  The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
  The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
  "Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress'd,
  At least our armies claim repast and rest:
  Long and laborious must the combat be,
  When by the gods inspired, and led by thee.
  Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,
  And those augment by generous wine and food:
  What boastful son of war, without that stay,
  Can last a hero through a single day?
  Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength,
  Mere unsupported man must yield at length;
  Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined,
  The drooping body will desert the mind:
  But built anew with strength-conferring fare,
  With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
  Dismiss the people, then, and give command.
  With strong repast to hearten every band;
  But let the presents to Achilles made,
  In full assembly of all Greece be laid.
  The king of men shall rise in public sight,
  And solemn swear (observant of the rite)
  That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes,
  Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
  That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made,
  And the full price of injured honour paid.
  Stretch not henceforth, O prince.! thy sovereign might
  Beyond the bounds of reason and of right;
  'Tis the chief praise that e'er to kings belong'd,
  To right with justice whom with power they wrong'd."

  To him the monarch: "Just is thy decree,
  Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee.
  Each due atonement gladly I prepare;
  And heaven regard me as I justly swear!
  Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,
  Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay.
  Till from the fleet our presents be convey'd,
  And Jove attesting, the firm compact made.
  A train of noble youths the charge shall bear;
  These to select, Ulysses, be thy care:
  In order rank'd let all our gifts appear,
  And the fair train of captives close the rear:
  Talthybius shall the victim boar convey,
  Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day."

  "For this (the stern Cacides replies)
  Some less important season may suffice,
  When the stern fury of the war is o'er,
  And wrath, extinguish'd, burns my breast no more.
  By Hector slain, their faces to the sky,
  All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie:
  Those call to war! and might my voice incite,
  Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight:
  Then, when the day's complete, let generous bowls,
  And copious banquets, glad your weary souls.
  Let not my palate know the taste of food,
  Till my insatiate rage be cloy'd with blood:
  Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured o'er,
  And his cold feet are pointed to the door.
  Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care,
  Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there;
  Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds,
  And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds."

  "O first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoin'd,)
  The best and bravest of the warrior kind!
  Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine,
  But old experience and calm wisdom mine.
  Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield,
  The bravest soon are satiate of the field;
  Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain,
  The bloody harvest brings but little gain:
  The scale of conquest ever wavering lies,
  Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies!
  The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall,
  And endless were the grief, to weep for all.
  Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?
  Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead:
  Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay
  The tribute of a melancholy day.
  One chief with patience to the grave resign'd,
  Our care devolves on others left behind.
  Let generous food supplies of strength produce,
  Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice,
  Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow,
  And pour new furies on the feebler foe.
  Yet a short interval, and none shall dare
  Expect a second summons to the war;
  Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find,
  If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
  Embodied, to the battle let us bend,
  And all at once on haughty Troy descend."

  And now the delegates Ulysses sent,
  To bear the presents from the royal tent:
  The sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant heir,
  Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
  With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
  And Melanippus, form'd the chosen train.
  Swift as the word was given, the youths obey'd:
  Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
  A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
  And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
  Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
  The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose,
  Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,
  First of the train, the golden talents bore:
  The rest in public view the chiefs dispose,
  A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:
  The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord
  Drew the broad cutlass sheath'd beside his sword:
  The stubborn bristles from the victim's brow
  He crops, and offering meditates his vow.
  His hands uplifted to the attesting skies,
  On heaven's broad marble roof were fixed his eyes.
  The solemn words a deep attention draw,
  And Greece around sat thrill'd with sacred awe.

  "Witness thou first! thou greatest power above,
  All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
  And mother-earth, and heaven's revolving light,
  And ye, fell furies of the realms of night,
  Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
  For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
  The black-eyed maid inviolate removes,
  Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
  If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed,
  And levell'd thunder strike my guilty head!"

  With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound;
  The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground;
  The sacred herald rolls the victim slain
  (A feast for fish) into the foaming main.

  Then thus Achilles: "Hear, ye Greeks! and know
  Whate'er we feel, 'tis Jove inflicts the woe;
  Not else Atrides could our rage inflame,
  Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame.
  'Twas Jove's high will alone, o'erruling all,
  That doom'd our strife, and doom'd the Greeks to fall.
  Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite;
  Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight."

  The speedy council at his word adjourn'd:
  To their black vessels all the Greeks return'd.
  Achilles sought his tent. His train before
  March'd onward, bending with the gifts they bore.
  Those in the tents the squires industrious spread:
  The foaming coursers to the stalls they led;
  To their new seats the female captives move
  Briseis, radiant as the queen of love,
  Slow as she pass'd, beheld with sad survey
  Where, gash'd with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
  Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair,
  Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;
  All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes
  Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:

  "Ah, youth for ever dear, for ever kind,
  Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
  I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;
  Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
  What woes my wretched race of life attend!
  Sorrows on sorrows, never doom'd to end!
  The first loved consort of my virgin bed
  Before these eyes in fatal battle bled:
  My three brave brothers in one mournful day
  All trod the dark, irremeable way:
  Thy friendly hand uprear'd me from the plain,
  And dried my sorrows for a husband slain;
  Achilles' care you promised I should prove,
  The first, the dearest partner of his love;
  That rites divine should ratify the band,
  And make me empress in his native land.
  Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
  For thee, that ever felt another's woe!"

  Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
  Nor mourn'd Patroclus' fortunes, but their own.
  The leaders press'd the chief on every side;
  Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

  "If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
  Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
  Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
  To grief and anguish one abstemious day."

  He spoke, and from the warriors turn'd his face:
  Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus' race,
  Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
  And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
  His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
  He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

  "Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
  Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
  Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
  Once stay'd Achilles, rushing to the war.
  But now, alas! to death's cold arms resign'd,
  What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
  What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
  What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
  Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
  His son's sad fate, and drops a tender tear.
  What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
  My only offspring, sink into the grave?
  If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far,
  Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)
  I could not this, this cruel stroke attend;
  Fate claim'd Achilles, but might spare his friend.
  I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
  My tender orphan with a parent's care,
  From Scyros' isle conduct him o'er the main,
  And glad his eyes with his paternal reign,
  The lofty palace, and the large domain.
  For Peleus breathes no more the vital air;
  Or drags a wretched life of age and care,
  But till the news of my sad fate invades
  His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades."

  Sighing he said: his grief the heroes join'd,
  Each stole a tear for what he left behind.
  Their mingled grief the sire of heaven survey'd,
  And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid:

  "Is then Achilles now no more thy care,
  And dost thou thus desert the great in war?
  Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend,
  All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend:
  Ere thirst and want his forces have oppress'd,
  Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast."

  He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove,
  Shot the descending goddess from above.
  So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs,
  The wide air floating to her ample wings,
  To great Achilles she her flight address'd,
  And pour'd divine ambrosia in his breast,(259)
  With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!)
  Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes.

  Now issued from the ships the warrior-train,
  And like a deluge pour'd upon the plain.
  As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow,
  And scatter o'er the fields the driving snow;
  From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies,
  Whose dazzling lustre whitens all the skies:
  So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields,
  Catch the quick beams, and brighten all the fields;
  Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays,
  Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze;
  Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound;
  With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around,

  Full in the midst, high-towering o'er the rest,
  His limbs in arms divine Achilles dress'd;
  Arms which the father of the fire bestow'd,
  Forged on the eternal anvils of the god.
  Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire,
  His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire;
  He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay
  O'erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.

  The silver cuishes first his thighs infold;
  Then o'er his breast was braced the hollow gold;
  The brazen sword a various baldric tied,
  That, starr'd with gems, hung glittering at his side;
  And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield
  Blazed with long rays, and gleam'd athwart the field.

  So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears,
  Wide o'er the watery waste, a light appears,
  Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high,
  Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky:
  With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
  Loud howls the storm, and drives them o'er the main.

  Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind
  The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind:
  Like the red star, that from his flaming hair
  Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war;
  So stream'd the golden honours from his head,
  Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
  The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
  His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
  Buoy'd by some inward force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.

  And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
  Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,
  From Pelion's cloudy top an ash entire
  Old Chiron fell'd, and shaped it for his sire;
  A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
  The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

  Automedon and Alcimus prepare
  The immortal coursers, and the radiant car;
  (The silver traces sweeping at their side;)
  Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied;
  The ivory-studded reins, return'd behind,
  Waved o'er their backs, and to the chariot join'd.
  The charioteer then whirl'd the lash around,
  And swift ascended at one active bound.
  All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
  Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;
  Not brighter Phoebus in the ethereal way
  Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
  High o'er the host, all terrible he stands,
  And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:

  "Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' strain,
  (Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)
  Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
  And learn to make your master more your care:
  Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
  Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord."

  The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
  Seem'd sensible of woe, and droop'd his head:
  Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
  And bow'd to dust the honours of his mane.
  When, strange to tell! (so Juno will'd) he broke
  Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
  "Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear
  Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
  But come it will, the fatal time must come,
  Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
  Not through our crime, or slowness in the course,
  Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force;
  The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day
  (Confess'd we saw him) tore his arms way.
  No--could our swiftness o'er the winds prevail,
  Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
  All were in vain--the Fates thy death demand,
  Due to a mortal and immortal hand."

  Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
  His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied
  With unabated rage--"So let it be!
  Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
  I know my fate: to die, to see no more
  My much-loved parents, and my native shore--
  Enough--when heaven ordains, I sink in night:
  Now perish Troy!" He said, and rush'd to fight.

                        [Illustration: HERCULES.]

                                HERCULES.





BOOK XX.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.

Jupiter, upon Achilles' return to the battle, calls a council of the gods,
and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the combat
described, when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Cneas to meet
Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes encounter; but Cneas
is preserved by the assistance of Neptune. Achilles falls upon the rest of
the Trojans, and is upon the point of killing Hector, but Apollo conveys
him away in a cloud. Achilles pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter.

The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy.

  Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood
  Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood;
  While near impending from a neighbouring height,
  Troy's black battalions wait the shock of fight.
  Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call
  The gods to council in the starry hall:
  Swift o'er Olympus' hundred hills she flies,
  And summons all the senate of the skies.
  These shining on, in long procession come
  To Jove's eternal adamantine dome.
  Not one was absent, not a rural power
  That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;
  Each fair-hair'd dryad of the shady wood,
  Each azure sister of the silver flood;
  All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps
  His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
  On marble thrones, with lucid columns crown'd,
  (The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around.
  Even he whose trident sways the watery reign
  Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main,
  Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
  And question'd thus the sire of men and gods:

  "What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
  And grasps the thunder in his awful hands,
  Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
  Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?
  Already met, the louring hosts appear,
  And death stands ardent on the edge of war."

  "'Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies)
  This day we call the council of the skies
  In care of human race; even Jove's own eye
  Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
  Far on Olympus' top in secret state
  Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate
  Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend,
  And as your minds direct, your succour lend
  To either host. Troy soon must lie o'erthrown,
  If uncontroll'd Achilles fights alone:
  Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes;
  What can they now, if in his rage he rise?
  Assist them, gods! or Ilion's sacred wall
  May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall."

  He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.
  On adverse parts the warring gods engage:
  Heaven's awful queen; and he whose azure round
  Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renown'd;
  Hermes, of profitable arts the sire;
  And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire:
  These to the fleet repair with instant flight;
  The vessels tremble as the gods alight.
  In aid of Troy, Latona, Phoebus came,
  Mars fiery-helm'd, the laughter-loving dame,
  Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow,
  And the chaste huntress of the silver bow.
  Ere yet the gods their various aid employ,
  Each Argive bosom swell'd with manly joy,
  While great Achilles (terror of the plain),
  Long lost to battle, shone in arms again.
  Dreadful he stood in front of all his host;
  Pale Troy beheld, and seem'd already lost;
  Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear,
  And trembling see another god of war.

  But when the powers descending swell'd the fight,
  Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright
  Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms,
  Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.
  Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls,
  And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.
  Mars hovering o'er his Troy, his terror shrouds
  In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds:
  Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours
  With voice divine, from Ilion's topmost towers:
  Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill;
  The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.

  Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls,
  And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.
  Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground;
  The forests wave, the mountains nod around;
  Through all their summits tremble Ida's woods,
  And from their sources boil her hundred floods.
  Troy's turrets totter on the rocking plain,
  And the toss'd navies beat the heaving main.
  Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,(260)
  The infernal monarch rear'd his horrid head,
  Leap'd from his throne, lest Neptune's arm should lay
  His dark dominions open to the day,
  And pour in light on Pluto's drear abodes,
  Abhorr'd by men, and dreadful even to gods.(261)

              [Illustration: THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.]

                      THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE.


  Such war the immortals wage; such horrors rend
  The world's vast concave, when the gods contend
  First silver-shafted Phoebus took the plain
  Against blue Neptune, monarch of the main.
  The god of arms his giant bulk display'd,
  Opposed to Pallas, war's triumphant maid.
  Against Latona march'd the son of May.
  The quiver'd Dian, sister of the day,
  (Her golden arrows sounding at her side,)
  Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
  With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands
  The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands;
  Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth,
  But called Scamander by the sons of earth.

  While thus the gods in various league engage,
  Achilles glow'd with more than mortal rage:
  Hector he sought; in search of Hector turn'd
  His eyes around, for Hector only burn'd;
  And burst like lightning through the ranks, and vow'd
  To glut the god of battles with his blood.

  Cneas was the first who dared to stay;
  Apollo wedged him in the warrior's way,
  But swell'd his bosom with undaunted might,
  Half-forced and half-persuaded to the fight.
  Like young Lycaon, of the royal line,
  In voice and aspect, seem'd the power divine;
  And bade the chief reflect, how late with scorn
  In distant threats he braved the goddess-born.

  Then thus the hero of Anchises' strain:
  "To meet Pelides you persuade in vain:
  Already have I met, nor void of fear
  Observed the fury of his flying spear;
  From Ida's woods he chased us to the field,
  Our force he scattered, and our herds he kill'd;
  Lyrnessus, Pedasus in ashes lay;
  But (Jove assisting) I survived the day:
  Else had I sunk oppress'd in fatal fight
  By fierce Achilles and Minerva's might.
  Where'er he moved, the goddess shone before,
  And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.
  What mortal man Achilles can sustain?
  The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain,
  And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
  Were God my aid, this arm should check his power,
  Though strong in battle as a brazen tower."

  To whom the son of Jove: "That god implore,
  And be what great Achilles was before.
  From heavenly Venus thou deriv'st thy strain,
  And he but from a sister of the main;
  An aged sea-god father of his line;
  But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
  Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow,
  Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe."

  This said, and spirit breathed into his breast,
  Through the thick troops the embolden'd hero press'd:
  His venturous act the white-arm'd queen survey'd,
  And thus, assembling all the powers, she said:

  "Behold an action, gods! that claims your care,
  Lo great Cneas rushing to the war!
  Against Pelides he directs his course,
  Phoebus impels, and Phoebus gives him force.
  Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend
  Our favour'd hero, let some power descend.
  To guard his life, and add to his renown,
  We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
  Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
  That spun so short his life's illustrious line:(262)
  But lest some adverse god now cross his way,
  Give him to know what powers assist this day:
  For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,
  When heaven's refulgent host appear in arms?"(263)

  Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make
  The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
  "Against the might of man, so feeble known,
  Why should celestial powers exert their own?
  Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,
  And leave to war the fates of mortal men.
  But if the armipotent, or god of light,
  Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight.
  Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend:
  Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;
  And these, in ruin and confusion hurl'd,
  Yield to our conquering arms the lower world."

  Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea,
  Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
  Advanced upon the field there stood a mound
  Of earth congested, wall'd, and trench'd around;
  In elder times to guard Alcides made,
  (The work of Trojans, with Minerva's aid,)
  What time a vengeful monster of the main
  Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain.

  Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair,
  With clouds encompass'd, and a veil of air:
  The adverse powers, around Apollo laid,
  Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade.
  In circle close each heavenly party sat,
  Intent to form the future scheme of fate;
  But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high
  Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply.

  Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground;
  The trampled centre yields a hollow sound:
  Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright,
  The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.
  Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear,
  There great Achilles; bold Cneas, here.
  With towering strides Aeneas first advanced;
  The nodding plumage on his helmet danced:
  Spread o'er his breast the fencing shield he bore,
  And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before.
  Not so Pelides; furious to engage,
  He rush'd impetuous. Such the lion's rage,
  Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes,
  Though all in arms the peopled city rise,
  Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride;
  Till at the length, by some brave youth defied,
  To his bold spear the savage turns alone,
  He murmurs fury with a hollow groan;
  He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes around
  Lash'd by his tail his heaving sides resound;
  He calls up all his rage; he grinds his teeth,
  Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death.
  So fierce Achilles on Cneas flies;
  So stands Cneas, and his force defies.
  Ere yet the stern encounter join'd, begun
  The seed of Thetis thus to Venus' son:

  "Why comes Cneas through the ranks so far?
  Seeks he to meet Achilles' arm in war,
  In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy,
  And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?
  Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies,
  The partial monarch may refuse the prize;
  Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell:
  And 'tis his fault to love those sons too well,
  Or, in reward of thy victorious hand,
  Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land
  An ample forest, or a fair domain,
  Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?
  Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.
  But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
  Once (as I think) you saw this brandish'd spear
  And then the great Cneas seem'd to fear:
  With hearty haste from Ida's mount he fled,
  Nor, till he reach'd Lyrnessus, turn'd his head.
  Her lofty walls not long our progress stay'd;
  Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid:
  In Grecian chains her captive race were cast;
  'Tis true, the great Aeneas fled too fast.
  Defrauded of my conquest once before,
  What then I lost, the gods this day restore.
  Go; while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
  Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

  To this Anchises' son: "Such words employ
  To one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy;
  Such we disdain; the best may be defied
  With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;
  Unworthy the high race from which we came
  Proclaim'd so loudly by the voice of fame:
  Each from illustrious fathers draws his line;
  Each goddess-born; half human, half divine.
  Thetis' this day, or Venus' offspring dies,
  And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes:
  For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,
  'Tis not in words the glorious strife can end.
  If yet thou further seek to learn my birth
  (A tale resounded through the spacious earth)
  Hear how the glorious origin we prove
  From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
  Dardania's walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
  (The city since of many-languaged men,)
  Was not. The natives were content to till
  The shady foot of Ida's fountful hill.(264)
  From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs,
  The richest, once, of Asia's wealthy kings;
  Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred,
  Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
  Boreas, enamour'd of the sprightly train,
  Conceal'd his godhead in a flowing mane,
  With voice dissembled to his loves he neigh'd,
  And coursed the dappled beauties o'er the mead:
  Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall'd kind,
  Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
  These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,
  Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;
  And when along the level seas they flew,(265)
  Scarce on the surface curl'd the briny dew.
  Such Erichthonius was: from him there came
  The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
  Three sons renown'd adorn'd his nuptial bed,
  Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
  The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
  Whom heaven, enamour'd, snatch'd to upper air,
  To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest,
  The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
  The two remaining sons the line divide:
  First rose Laomedon from Ilus' side;
  From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old,
  And Priam, bless'd with Hector, brave and bold;
  Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour'd pair;
  And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war.
  From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he
  Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
  Such is our race: 'tis fortune gives us birth,
  But Jove alone endues the soul with worth:
  He, source of power and might! with boundless sway,
  All human courage gives, or takes away.
  Long in the field of words we may contend,
  Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
  Arm'd or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;
  So voluble a weapon is the tongue;
  Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
  For every man has equal strength to rail:
  Women alone, when in the streets they jar,
  Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;
  Like us they stand, encompass'd with the crowd,
  And vent their anger impotent and loud.
  Cease then--Our business in the field of fight
  Is not to question, but to prove our might.
  To all those insults thou hast offer'd here,
  Receive this answer: 'tis my flying spear."

  He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung,
  Fix'd deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
  Far on his outstretch'd arm, Pelides held
  (To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield,
  That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear
  Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
  His fears were vain; impenetrable charms
  Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
  Through two strong plates the point its passage held,
  But stopp'd, and rested, by the third repell'd.
  Five plates of various metal, various mould,
  Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,
  Of tin each inward, and the middle gold:
  There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw,
  The forceful spear of great Achilles flew,
  And pierced the Dardan shield's extremest bound,
  Where the shrill brass return'd a sharper sound:
  Through the thin verge the Pelean weapon glides,
  And the slight covering of expanded hides.
  Cneas his contracted body bends,
  And o'er him high the riven targe extends,
  Sees, through its parting plates, the upper air,
  And at his back perceives the quivering spear:
  A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright;
  And swims before his eyes the many-colour'd light.
  Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries,
  Draws his broad blade, and at Cneas flies:
  Cneas rousing as the foe came on,
  With force collected, heaves a mighty stone:
  A mass enormous! which in modern days
  No two of earth's degenerate sons could raise.
  But ocean's god, whose earthquakes rock the ground.
  Saw the distress, and moved the powers around:

  "Lo! on the brink of fate Cneas stands,
  An instant victim to Achilles' hands;
  By Phoebus urged; but Phoebus has bestow'd
  His aid in vain: the man o'erpowers the god.
  And can ye see this righteous chief atone
  With guiltless blood for vices not his own?
  To all the gods his constant vows were paid;
  Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid.
  Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign
  The future father of the Dardan line:(266)
  The first great ancestor obtain'd his grace,
  And still his love descends on all the race:
  For Priam now, and Priam's faithless kind,
  At length are odious to the all-seeing mind;
  On great Cneas shall devolve the reign,
  And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain."

  The great earth-shaker thus: to whom replies
  The imperial goddess with the radiant eyes:
  "Good as he is, to immolate or spare
  The Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care;
  Pallas and I, by all that gods can bind,
  Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind;
  Not even an instant to protract their fate,
  Or save one member of the sinking state;
  Till her last flame be quench'd with her last gore,
  And even her crumbling ruins are no more."

  The king of ocean to the fight descends,
  Through all the whistling darts his course he bends,
  Swift interposed between the warrior flies,
  And casts thick darkness o'er Achilles' eyes.(267)
  From great Cneas' shield the spear he drew,
  And at his master's feet the weapon threw.
  That done, with force divine he snatch'd on high
  The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky,
  Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads
  Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds:
  Till at the battle's utmost verge they light,
  Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.
  The godhead there (his heavenly form confess'd)
  With words like these the panting chief address'd:

  "What power, O prince! with force inferior far,
  Urged thee to meet Achilles' arm in war?
  Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom,
  Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
  But when the day decreed (for come it must)
  Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust,
  Let then the furies of that arm be known,
  Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own."

  With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
  Then from Achilles chased the mist away:
  Sudden, returning with a stream of light,
  The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
  Then thus, amazed; "What wonders strike my mind!
  My spear, that parted on the wings of wind,
  Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,
  That fell this instant, vanish'd from my sword!
  I thought alone with mortals to contend,
  But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
  Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,
  Content for once, with all his gods, to fly.
  Now then let others bleed." This said, aloud
  He vents his fury and inflames the crowd:
  "O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)
  Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
  'Tis not in me, though favour'd by the sky,
  To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:
  No god can singly such a host engage,
  Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva's rage.
  But whatsoe'er Achilles can inspire,
  Whate'er of active force, or acting fire;
  Whate'er this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
  All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
  Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
  And thin the squadrons with my single spear."

  He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
  The godlike Hector warm'd the troops of Troy:
  "Trojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;
  Nor dread the vaunts of Peleus' haughty son.
  Deeds must decide our fate. E'en these with words
  Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords:
  The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies,
  But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
  Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire,
  Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire;
  That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,
  And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand."

  Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;
  A wood of lances rises round his head,
  Clamours on clamours tempest all the air,
  They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
  But Phoebus warns him from high heaven to shun
  The single fight with Thetis' godlike son;
  More safe to combat in the mingled band,
  Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand.
  He hears, obedient to the god of light,
  And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight.

  Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies,
  On Troy's whole force with boundless fury flies.
  First falls Iphytion, at his army's head;
  Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led;
  From great Otrynteus he derived his blood,
  His mother was a Nais, of the flood;
  Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crown'd with snow,
  From Hyde's walls he ruled the lands below.
  Fierce as he springs, the sword his head divides:
  The parted visage falls on equal sides:
  With loud-resounding arms he strikes the plain;
  While thus Achilles glories o'er the slain:

  "Lie there, Otryntides! the Trojan earth
  Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy birth;
  Those beauteous fields where Hyllus' waves are roll'd,
  And plenteous Hermus swells with tides of gold,
  Are thine no more."--The insulting hero said,
  And left him sleeping in eternal shade.
  The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore,
  And dash'd their axles with no vulgar gore.

  Demoleon next, Antenor's offspring, laid
  Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
  The impatient steel with full-descending sway
  Forced through his brazen helm its furious way,
  Resistless drove the batter'd skull before,
  And dash'd and mingled all the brains with gore.
  This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,
  Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight:
  The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound
  The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
  He groans away his soul: not louder roars,
  At Neptune's shrine on Helice's high shores,
  The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,
  And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
  Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,(268)
  The youngest hope of Priam's stooping age:
  (Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpass'd:)
  Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
  To the forbidden field he takes his flight,
  In the first folly of a youthful knight,
  To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain,
  But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:
  Struck where the crossing belts unite behind,
  And golden rings the double back-plate join'd
  Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;
  And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell;
  The rushing entrails pour'd upon the ground
  His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round.
  When Hector view'd, all ghastly in his gore,
  Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,
  A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight,
  His soul no longer brook'd the distant fight:
  Full in Achilles' dreadful front he came,
  And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
  The son of Peleus sees, with joy possess'd,
  His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
  "And, lo! the man on whom black fates attend;
  The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
  No more shall Hector's and Pelides' spear
  Turn from each other in the walks of war."--
  Then with revengeful eyes he scann'd him o'er:
  "Come, and receive thy fate!" He spake no more.

  Hector, undaunted, thus: "Such words employ
  To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:
  Such we could give, defying and defied,
  Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride!
  I know thy force to mine superior far;
  But heaven alone confers success in war:
  Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart,
  And give it entrance in a braver heart."

  Then parts the lance: but Pallas' heavenly breath
  Far from Achilles wafts the winged death:
  The bidden dart again to Hector flies,
  And at the feet of its great master lies.
  Achilles closes with his hated foe,
  His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow:
  But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds
  The favour'd hero in a veil of clouds.
  Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart,
  Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart;
  The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud.
  He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud:

  "Wretch! thou hast 'scaped again; once more thy flight
  Has saved thee, and the partial god of light.
  But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand,
  If any power assist Achilles' hand.
  Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day
  Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay."

  With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain:
  Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain,
  Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there,
  And stopp'd Demuchus, great Philetor's heir.
  Gigantic chief! deep gash'd the enormous blade,
  And for the soul an ample passage made.
  Laoganus and Dardanus expire,
  The valiant sons of an unhappy sire;
  Both in one instant from the chariot hurl'd,
  Sunk in one instant to the nether world:
  This difference only their sad fates afford
  That one the spear destroy'd, and one the sword.

  Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds;
  In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads;
  In vain he begs thee, with a suppliant's moan,
  To spare a form, an age so like thy own!
  Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art,
  E'er bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
  While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried,
  The ruthless falchion oped his tender side;
  The panting liver pours a flood of gore
  That drowns his bosom till he pants no more.

  Through Mulius' head then drove the impetuous spear:
  The warrior falls, transfix'd from ear to ear.
  Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves,
  Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves;
  Warm'd in the brain the smoking weapon lies,
  The purple death comes floating o'er his eyes.
  Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung
  Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung;
  He dropp'd his arm, an unassisting weight,
  And stood all impotent, expecting fate:
  Full on his neck the falling falchion sped,
  From his broad shoulders hew'd his crested head:
  Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies,
  And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.
  Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came,
  (The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,)
  Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends;
  Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.
  The squire, who saw expiring on the ground
  His prostrate master, rein'd the steeds around;
  His back, scarce turn'd, the Pelian javelin gored,
  And stretch'd the servant o'er his dying lord.
  As when a flame the winding valley fills,
  And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills;
  Then o'er the stubble up the mountain flies,
  Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
  This way and that, the spreading torrent roars:
  So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;
  Around him wide, immense destruction pours
  And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers
  As with autumnal harvests cover'd o'er,
  And thick bestrewn, lies Ceres' sacred floor;
  When round and round, with never-wearied pain,
  The trampling steers beat out the unnumber'd grain:
  So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,
  Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroes' souls,
  Dash'd from their hoofs while o'er the dead they fly,
  Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:
  The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore;
  And thick the groaning axles dropp'd with gore.
  High o'er the scene of death Achilles stood,
  All grim with dust, all horrible in blood:
  Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;
  Such is the lust of never-dying fame!

                         [Illustration: CENTAUR.]

                                 CENTAUR.





BOOK XXI.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.(269)

The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the
river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and kills
Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves: Neptune
and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length Vulcan, by
the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This Combat ended, the
other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles continues the slaughter,
drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a stand, and is conveyed away
in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor's
shape, and while he pursues him in that disguise, gives the Trojans an
opportunity of retiring into their city.

The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream of
Scamander.

  And now to Xanthus' gliding stream they drove,
  Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
  The river here divides the flying train,
  Part to the town fly diverse o'er the plain,
  Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,
  Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
  (These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds,
  And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)
  Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars,
  The flashing billows beat the whiten'd shores:
  With cries promiscuous all the banks resound,
  And here, and there, in eddies whirling round,
  The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drown'd.
  As the scorch'd locusts from their fields retire,
  While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire;
  Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,
  The clustering legions rush into the flood:
  So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles' force,
  Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
  His bloody lance the hero casts aside,
  (Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,)
  Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,
  Arm'd with his sword, high brandish'd o'er the waves:
  Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
  Deep groan'd the waters with the dying sound;
  Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed,
  And the warm purple circled on the tide.
  Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly,
  And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:
  So the huge dolphin tempesting the main,
  In shoals before him fly the scaly train,
  Confusedly heap'd they seek their inmost caves,
  Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
  Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
  Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
  With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
  (Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
  These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
  Sad victims destined to Patroclus' shade;

  Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
  The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
  The son of Priam; whom the hero's hand
  But late made captive in his father's land
  (As from a sycamore, his sounding steel
  Lopp'd the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel)
  To Lemnos' isle he sold the royal slave,
  Where Jason's son the price demanded gave;
  But kind Eetion, touching on the shore,
  The ransom'd prince to fair Arisbe bore.
  Ten days were past, since in his father's reign
  He felt the sweets of liberty again;
  The next, that god whom men in vain withstand
  Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand
  Now never to return! and doom'd to go
  A sadder journey to the shades below.
  His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,
  (The helm and visor he had cast aside
  With wild affright, and dropp'd upon the field
  His useless lance and unavailing shield,)
  As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,
  And knock'd his faltering knees, the hero said.
  "Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
  Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
  Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans kill'd
  Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field;
  As now the captive, whom so late I bound
  And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!
  Not him the sea's unmeasured deeps detain,
  That bar such numbers from their native plain;
  Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!
  Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer;
  If earth, at length this active prince can seize,
  Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules."

  Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears
  Approach'd, and sought his knees with suppliant tears
  Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath,
  And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
  Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;
  He kiss'd his feet, extended on the ground:
  And while, above, the spear suspended stood,
  Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood,
  One hand embraced them close, one stopp'd the dart,
  While thus these melting words attempt his heart:

  "Thy well-known captive, great Achilles! see,
  Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.
  Some pity to a suppliant's name afford,
  Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board;
  Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore,
  Far from his father, friends, and native shore;
  A hundred oxen were his price that day,
  Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.
  Scarce respited from woes I yet appear,
  And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here;
  Lo! Jove again submits me to thy hands,
  Again, her victim cruel Fate demands!
  I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair,
  (Old Altes' daughter, and Lelegia's heir;
  Who held in Pedasus his famed abode,
  And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flow'd,)
  Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore;
  For ah! one spear shall drink each brother's gore,
  And I succeed to slaughter'd Polydore.
  How from that arm of terror shall I fly?
  Some demon urges! 'tis my doom to die!
  If ever yet soft pity touch'd thy mind,
  Ah! think not me too much of Hector's kind!
  Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath,
  With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus' death."

  These words, attended with a shower of tears,
  The youth address'd to unrelenting ears:
  "Talk not of life, or ransom (he replies):
  Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
  In vain a single Trojan sues for grace;
  But least, the sons of Priam's hateful race.
  Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?
  The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
  He, far thy better, was foredoom'd to die,
  And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
  Seest thou not me, whom nature's gifts adorn,
  Sprung from a hero, from a goddess born?
  The day shall come (which nothing can avert)
  When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart,
  By night, or day, by force, or by design,
  Impending death and certain fate are mine!
  Die then,"--He said; and as the word he spoke,
  The fainting stripling sank before the stroke:
  His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear,
  While all his trembling frame confess'd his fear:
  Sudden, Achilles his broad sword display'd,
  And buried in his neck the reeking blade.
  Prone fell the youth; and panting on the land,
  The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand.
  The victor to the stream the carcase gave,
  And thus insults him, floating on the wave:

  "Lie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround
  Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound:
  There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep,
  But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep,
  Whose every wave some watery monster brings,
  To feast unpunish'd on the fat of kings.
  So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line!
  Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
  What boots ye now Scamander's worshipp'd stream,
  His earthly honours, and immortal name?
  In vain your immolated bulls are slain,
  Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
  Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate;
  Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete:
  Thus is atoned Patroclus' honour'd shade,
  And the short absence of Achilles paid."

  These boastful words provoked the raging god;
  With fury swells the violated flood.
  What means divine may yet the power employ
  To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
  Meanwhile the hero springs in arms, to dare
  The great Asteropeus to mortal war;
  The son of Pelagon, whose lofty line
  Flows from the source of Axius, stream divine!
  (Fair Peribaea's love the god had crown'd,
  With all his refluent waters circled round:)
  On him Achilles rush'd; he fearless stood,
  And shook two spears, advancing from the flood;
  The flood impell'd him, on Pelides' head
  To avenge his waters choked with heaps of dead.
  Near as they drew, Achilles thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sire
  Whose son encounters our resistless ire."

  "O son of Peleus! what avails to trace
  (Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
  From rich Paeonia's valleys I command,
  Arm'd with protended spears, my native band;
  Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
  In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
  Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floated region fills,
  Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
  Now lift thy arm, and try that hero's son!"

  Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
  At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
  (For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
  One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
  One razed Achilles' hand; the spouting blood
  Spun forth; in earth the fasten'd weapon stood.
  Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
  Its erring fury hiss'd along the skies;
  Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
  Even to the middle earth; and quiver'd there.
  Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
  And on his foe with double fury flew.
  The foe thrice tugg'd, and shook the rooted wood;
  Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
  The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
  Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
  His belly open'd with a ghastly wound,
  The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
  Beneath the hero's feet he panting lies,
  And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
  While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
  His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

  "So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
  Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
  Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
  But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
  How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
  Of Peleus, Cacus, and Jove, am I.
  The race of these superior far to those,
  As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
  What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
  But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
  Even Achelous might contend in vain,
  And all the roaring billows of the main.
  The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow
  The seas, the rivers, and the springs below,
  The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear,
  And in his deep abysses shakes with fear."

  He said: then from the bank his javelin tore,
  And left the breathless warrior in his gore.
  The floating tides the bloody carcase lave,
  And beat against it, wave succeeding wave;
  Till, roll'd between the banks, it lies the food
  Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood.
  All scatter'd round the stream (their mightiest slain)
  The amazed Paeonians scour along the plain;
  He vents his fury on the flying crew,
  Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew;
  Mydon, Thersilochus, with Cnius, fell;
  And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell,
  But from the bottom of his gulfs profound
  Scamander spoke; the shores return'd the sound.

  "O first of mortals! (for the gods are thine)
  In valour matchless, and in force divine!
  If Jove have given thee every Trojan head,
  'Tis not on me thy rage should heap the dead.
  See! my choked streams no more their course can keep,
  Nor roll their wonted tribute to the deep.
  Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood;
  Content, thy slaughters could amaze a god."

  In human form, confess'd before his eyes,
  The river thus; and thus the chief replies:
  "O sacred stream! thy word we shall obey;
  But not till Troy the destined vengeance pay,
  Not till within her towers the perjured train
  Shall pant, and tremble at our arms again;
  Not till proud Hector, guardian of her wall,
  Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall."

  He said; and drove with fury on the foe.
  Then to the godhead of the silver bow
  The yellow flood began: "O son of Jove!
  Was not the mandate of the sire above
  Full and express, that Phoebus should employ
  His sacred arrows in defence of Troy,
  And make her conquer, till Hyperion's fall
  In awful darkness hide the face of all?"

  He spoke in vain--The chief without dismay
  Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.
  Then rising in his rage above the shores,
  From all his deep the bellowing river roars,
  Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast,
  And round the banks the ghastly dead are toss'd.
  While all before, the billows ranged on high,
  (A watery bulwark,) screen the bands who fly.
  Now bursting on his head with thundering sound,
  The falling deluge whelms the hero round:
  His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide;
  His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide,
  Sliddering, and staggering. On the border stood
  A spreading elm, that overhung the flood;
  He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
  The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.(270)
  Heaving the bank, and undermining all;
  Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall
  Of the thick foliage. The large trunk display'd
  Bridged the rough flood across: the hero stay'd
  On this his weight, and raised upon his hand,
  Leap'd from the channel, and regain'd the land.
  Then blacken'd the wild waves: the murmur rose:
  The god pursues, a huger billow throws,
  And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy
  The man whose fury is the fate of Troy.
  He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace
  (Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race);
  Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs;
  At every bound his clanging armour rings:
  Now here, now there, he turns on every side,
  And winds his course before the following tide;
  The waves flow after, wheresoe'er he wheels,
  And gather fast, and murmur at his heels.
  So when a peasant to his garden brings
  Soft rills of water from the bubbling springs,
  And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers,
  And feed with pregnant streams the plants and flowers:
  Soon as he clears whate'er their passage stay'd,
  And marks the future current with his spade,
  Swift o'er the rolling pebbles, down the hills,
  Louder and louder purl the falling rills;
  Before him scattering, they prevent his pains,
  And shine in mazy wanderings o'er the plains.

  Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes
  Still swift Scamander rolls where'er he flies:
  Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods;
  The first of men, but not a match for gods.
  Oft as he turn'd the torrent to oppose,
  And bravely try if all the powers were foes;
  So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread,
  Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head.
  Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves,
  And still indignant bounds above the waves.
  Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil;
  Wash'd from beneath him slides the slimy soil;
  When thus (his eyes on heaven's expansion thrown)
  Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan:

  "Is there no god Achilles to befriend,
  No power to avert his miserable end?
  Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,(271)
  And make my future life the sport of fate.
  Of all heaven's oracles believed in vain,
  But most of Thetis must her son complain;
  By Phoebus' darts she prophesied my fall,
  In glorious arms before the Trojan wall.
  Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm,
  Stretch'd like a hero, by a hero's arm!
  Might Hector's spear this dauntless bosom rend,
  And my swift soul o'ertake my slaughter'd friend.
  Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate,
  Oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
  Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day,
  Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away,
  An unregarded carcase to the sea."

  Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,
  And thus in human form address'd the chief:
  The power of ocean first: "Forbear thy fear,
  O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear!
  Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,
  Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
  Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
  'Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
  But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
  Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
  Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
  Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
  Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
  And Hector's blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
  Thine is the glory doom'd." Thus spake the gods:
  Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

  Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell'd,
  He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
  O'er all the expanded plain the waters spread;
  Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
  Floating 'midst scatter'd arms; while casques of gold
  And turn'd-up bucklers glitter'd as they roll'd.
  High o'er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds,
  He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
  Not a whole river stops the hero's course,
  While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
  With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
  And lifts his billows, and o'erwhelms his shores.

  Then thus to Simois! "Haste, my brother flood;
  And check this mortal that controls a god;
  Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,
  And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
  Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,
  From all thy fountains swell thy watery store,
  With broken rocks, and with a load of dead,
  Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
  Mark how resistless through the floods he goes,
  And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
  But nor that force, nor form divine to sight,
  Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:
  Whelm'd under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,
  That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye;
  And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl'd,
  Immersed remain this terror of the world.
  Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,
  No Greeks shall e'er his perish'd relics grace,
  No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;
  These his cold rites, and this his watery tomb."

           [Illustration: ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.]

                   ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS.


  He said; and on the chief descends amain,
  Increased with gore, and swelling with the slain.
  Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves,
  And a foam whitens on the purple waves:
  At every step, before Achilles stood
  The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood.
  Fear touch'd the queen of heaven: she saw dismay'd,
  She call'd aloud, and summon'd Vulcan's aid.

  "Rise to the war! the insulting flood requires
  Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!
  While to their aid, by our command enjoin'd,
  Rush the swift eastern and the western wind:
  These from old ocean at my word shall blow,
  Pour the red torrent on the watery foe,
  Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn,
  And hissing rivers to their bottoms burn.
  Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power,
  Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
  Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim)
  Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!"

  The power ignipotent her word obeys:
  Wide o'er the plain he pours the boundless blaze;
  At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil
  And the shrunk waters in their channel boil.
  As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky,
  And instant blows the water'd gardens dry:
  So look'd the field, so whiten'd was the ground,
  While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.
  Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys;
  Along the margin winds the running blaze:
  The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn,
  The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn,
  Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire;
  The watery willows hiss before the fire.
  Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath,
  The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death:
  Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,
  Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
  At length the river rear'd his languid head,
  And thus, short-panting, to the god he said:

  "Oh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?
  I faint, I sink, unequal to the fight--
  I yield--Let Ilion fall; if fate decree--
  Ah--bend no more thy fiery arms on me!"

  He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round;
  The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
  As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,(272)
  To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,
  Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires
  The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:
  So boils the imprison'd flood, forbid to flow,
  And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
  To Juno then, imperial queen of air,
  The burning river sends his earnest prayer:

  "Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engage
  Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
  On other gods his dreadful arm employ,
  For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
  Submissive I desist, if thou command;
  But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
  Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate
  Unaided Ilion, and her destined state,
  Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,
  And in one ruin sink the Trojan name."

  His warm entreaty touch'd Saturnia's ear:
  She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear,
  Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause
  Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws:
  Again the branching streams begin to spread,
  And soft remurmur in their wonted bed.

  While these by Juno's will the strife resign,
  The warring gods in fierce contention join:
  Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms:
  With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:
  Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound;
  And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
  Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,
  And views contending gods with careless eyes.
  The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,
  And first assaults the radiant queen of war:

  "What moved thy madness, thus to disunite
  Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
  What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood
  Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god?
  Thy impious hand Tydides' javelin bore,
  And madly bathed it in celestial gore."

  He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield,
  Which bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful field:
  The adamantine aegis of her sire,
  That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.

  Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand
  A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land,
  There fix'd from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;
  This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
  Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:
  And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
  The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:
  Loud o'er the fields his ringing arms resound:
  The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles,
  And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:

  "Hast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known
  How far Minerva's force transcends thy own?
  Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand,
  Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas' hand;
  Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace,
  And partial aid to Troy's perfidious race."

  The goddess spoke, and turn'd her eyes away,
  That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
  Jove's Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,
  Lent to the wounded god her tender hand:
  Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,
  And, propp'd on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
  This the bright empress of the heavens survey'd,
  And, scoffing, thus to war's victorious maid:

  "Lo! what an aid on Mars's side is seen!
  The smiles' and loves' unconquerable queen!
  Mark with what insolence, in open view,
  She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue."

  Minerva smiling heard, the pair o'ertook,
  And slightly on her breast the wanton strook:
  She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled);
  On earth together lay the lovers spread.
  "And like these heroes be the fate of all
  (Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan wall!
  To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be,
  So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me;
  Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved."
  Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved.

  Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight,
  The god of ocean dares the god of light.
  "What sloth has seized us, when the fields around
  Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound:
  Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire,
  No deed perform'd, to our Olympian sire?
  Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage,
  Suits not my greatness, or superior age:
  Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne,
  (Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,)
  And guard the race of proud Laomedon!
  Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarch's prayer,
  We shared the lengthen'd labours of a year?
  Troy walls I raised (for such were Jove's commands),
  And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:
  Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves
  Along fair Ida's vales and pendant groves.
  But when the circling seasons in their train
  Brought back the grateful day that crown'd our pain,
  With menace stern the fraudful king defied
  Our latent godhead, and the prize denied:
  Mad as he was, he threaten'd servile bands,
  And doom'd us exiles far in barbarous lands.(273)
  Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing,
  And destined vengeance on the perjured king.
  Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace,
  And not, like us, infest the faithless race;
  Like us, their present, future sons destroy,
  And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?"

  Apollo thus: "To combat for mankind
  Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind;
  For what is man? Calamitous by birth,
  They owe their life and nourishment to earth;
  Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown'd,
  Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
  To their own hands commit the frantic scene,
  Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean."

  Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires,
  And from the senior power submiss retires:
  Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
  The quiver'd huntress of the sylvan shades:

  "And is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies,
  And yields to ocean's hoary sire the prize?
  How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show
  Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
  Now boast no more in yon celestial bower,
  Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power."

  Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid:
  Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:
  But furious thus: "What insolence has driven
  Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
  What though by Jove the female plague design'd,
  Fierce to the feeble race of womankind,
  The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;
  Thy sex's tyrant, with a tiger's heart?
  What though tremendous in the woodland chase
  Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
  How dares thy rashness on the powers divine
  Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
  Learn hence, no more unequal war to wage--"
  She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;
  These in her left hand lock'd, her right untied
  The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
  About her temples flies the busy bow;
  Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
  The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
  Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
  Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
  And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
  So, when the falcon wings her way above,
  To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove;
  (Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,
  Yet still her heart against the marble beats.

  To her Latona hastes with tender care;
  Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war:
  "How shall I face the dame, who gives delight
  To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
  Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies,
  And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize."

  He spoke; and pass'd: Latona, stooping low,
  Collects the scatter'd shafts and fallen bow,
  That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there
  Dishonour'd relics of Diana's war:
  Then swift pursued her to her blest abode,
  Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god;
  Weeping, she grasp'd his knees: the ambrosial vest
  Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast.

  The sire superior smiled, and bade her show
  What heavenly hand had caused his daughter's woe?
  Abash'd, she names his own imperial spouse;
  And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.

  Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down,
  Apollo enters Ilion's sacred town;
  The guardian-god now trembled for her wall,
  And fear'd the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.
  Back to Olympus, from the war's alarms,
  Return the shining bands of gods in arms;
  Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire;
  And take their thrones around the ethereal sire.

  Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,
  O'er slaughter'd heroes, and o'er rolling steeds.
  As when avenging flames with fury driven
  On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven;
  The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly;
  And the red vapours purple all the sky:
  So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay,
  And toils, and terrors, fill'd the dreadful day.

  High on a turret hoary Priam stands,
  And marks the waste of his destructive hands;
  Views, from his arm, the Trojans' scatter'd flight,
  And the near hero rising on his sight!
  No stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace,
  And settled sorrow on his aged face,
  Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls;
  And thus descending, on the guards he calls:

  "You to whose care our city-gates belong,
  Set wide your portals to the flying throng:
  For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway;
  He comes, and desolation marks his way!
  But when within the walls our troops take breath,
  Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death."
  Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung
  The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.
  Phoebus rush'd forth, the flying bands to meet;
  Struck slaughter back, and cover'd the retreat,
  On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate,
  And gladsome see their last escape from fate.
  Thither, all parch'd with thirst, a heartless train,
  Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain:
  And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on
  With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town.
  Enraged Achilles follows with his spear;
  Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.

  Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired,
  And Troy inglorious to her walls retired;
  But he, the god who darts ethereal flame,
  Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame:
  To young Agenor force divine he gave;
  (Antenor's offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;)
  In aid of him, beside the beech he sate,
  And wrapt in clouds, restrain'd the hand of fate.
  When now the generous youth Achilles spies.
  Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise.
  (So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.)
  He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul;

  "What, shall I fly this terror of the plain!
  Like others fly, and be like others slain?
  Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road
  Yon line of slaughter'd Trojans lately trod.
  No: with the common heap I scorn to fall--
  What if they pass'd me to the Trojan wall,
  While I decline to yonder path, that leads
  To Ida's forests and surrounding shades?
  So may I reach, conceal'd, the cooling flood,
  From my tired body wash the dirt and blood,
  As soon as night her dusky veil extends,
  Return in safety to my Trojan friends.
  What if?--But wherefore all this vain debate?
  Stand I to doubt, within the reach of fate?
  Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall,
  The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall:
  Such is his swiftness, 'tis in vain to fly,
  And such his valour, that who stands must die.
  Howe'er 'tis better, fighting for the state,
  Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
  Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel
  (Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel.
  One only soul informs that dreadful frame:
  And Jove's sole favour gives him all his fame."

  He said, and stood, collected, in his might;
  And all his beating bosom claim'd the fight.
  So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts,
  Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:
  Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds
  Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;
  Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;
  And the barb'd javelin stings his breast in vain:
  On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;
  And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
  Not less resolved, Antenor's valiant heir
  Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war,
  Disdainful of retreat: high held before,
  His shield (a broad circumference) he bore;
  Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
  The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:

  "How proud Achilles glories in his fame!
  And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name
  Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain;
  A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
  Parents and children our just arms employ,
  And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
  Great as thou art, even thou may'st stain with gore
  These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore."

  He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
  Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
  Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
  He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
  Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
  His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
  But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
  The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
  Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
  Dismiss'd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
  Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
  Assumes Agenor's habit, voice and shape,
  Flies from the furious chief in this disguise;
  The furious chief still follows where he flies.
  Now o'er the fields they stretch with lengthen'd strides,
  Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides:
  The god, now distant scarce a stride before,
  Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore;
  While all the flying troops their speed employ,
  And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy:
  No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
  Who 'scaped by flight, or who by battle fell.
  'Twas tumult all, and violence of flight;
  And sudden joy confused, and mix'd affright.
  Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate:
  And nations breathe, deliver'd from their fate.





BOOK XXII.


ARGUMENT.

THE DEATH OF HECTOR.

The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his son
to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain. Hector
consults within himself what measures to take; but at the advance of
Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achilles pursues him
thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning the fate of
Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles. She deludes
Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and is slain.
Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of Priam and
Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries reach the ears
of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into the inner part of
the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds her dead husband. She
swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and lamentation.

The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls, and on
the battlements of Troy.

  Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear,
  The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:
  There safe they wipe the briny drops away,
  And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
  Close to the walls, advancing o'er the fields
  Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields,
  March, bending on, the Greeks' embodied powers,
  Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
  Great Hector singly stay'd: chain'd down by fate
  There fix'd he stood before the Scaean gate;
  Still his bold arms determined to employ,
  The guardian still of long-defended Troy.

  Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:
  (The power confess'd in all his glory burns:)
  "And what (he cries) has Peleus' son in view,
  With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
  For not to thee to know the gods is given,
  Unskill'd to trace the latent marks of heaven.
  What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain?
  Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:
  Safe in their walls are now her troops bestow'd,
  While here thy frantic rage attacks a god."

  The chief incensed--"Too partial god of day!
  To check my conquests in the middle way:
  How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
  What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
  Thou robb'st me of a glory justly mine,
  Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
  Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
  To cheat a mortal who repines in vain."

  Then to the city, terrible and strong,
  With high and haughty steps he tower'd along,
  So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
  To the near goal with double ardour flies.
  Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
  The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
  Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,(274)
  Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
  Orion's dog (the year when autumn weighs),
  And o'er the feebler stars exerts his rays;
  Terrific glory! for his burning breath
  Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
  So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
  He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
  He lifts his wither'd arms; obtests the skies;
  He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
  The son, resolved Achilles' force to dare,
  Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
  While the sad father on the rampart stands,
  And thus adjures him with extended hands:

  "Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
  Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!
  Methinks already I behold thee slain,
  And stretch'd beneath that fury of the plain.
  Implacable Achilles! might'st thou be
  To all the gods no dearer than to me!
  Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore.
  And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
  How many valiant sons I late enjoy'd,
  Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy'd:
  Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles
  To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
  Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,
  Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore,
  And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
  Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live,
  What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!
  (Their grandsire's wealth, by right of birth their own,
  Consign'd his daughter with Lelegia's throne:)
  But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
  All pale they wander on the Stygian coast;
  What sorrows then must their sad mother know,
  What anguish I? unutterable woe!
  Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
  Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
  Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
  And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
  Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
  Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
  Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
  While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
  Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
  (All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
  Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
  The bitter dregs of fortune's cup to drain:
  To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
  And number all his days by miseries!
  My heroes slain, my bridal bed o'erturn'd,
  My daughters ravish'd, and my city burn'd,
  My bleeding infants dash'd against the floor;
  These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
  Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
  The last sad relic of my ruin'd state,
  (Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
  And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
  Where famish'd dogs, late guardians of my door,
  Shall lick their mangled master's spatter'd gore.
  Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! 'tis well;
  Well have they perish'd, for in fight they fell.
  Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
  Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
  But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
  Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
  In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
  And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
  This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
  That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!"

  He said, and acting what no words could say,
  Rent from his head the silver locks away.
  With him the mournful mother bears a part;
  Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector's heart.
  The zone unbraced, her bosom she display'd;
  And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

  "Have mercy on me, O my son! revere
  The words of age; attend a parent's prayer!
  If ever thee in these fond arms I press'd,
  Or still'd thy infant clamours at this breast;
  Ah do not thus our helpless years forego,
  But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
  Against his rage if singly thou proceed,
  Should'st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) should'st thou bleed,
  Nor must thy corse lie honour'd on the bier,
  Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear!
  Far from our pious rites those dear remains
  Must feast the vultures on the naked plains."

  So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll;
  But fix'd remains the purpose of his soul;
  Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance
  Expects the hero's terrible advance.
  So, roll'd up in his den, the swelling snake
  Beholds the traveller approach the brake;
  When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins
  Have gather'd half the poisons of the plains;
  He burns, he stiffens with collected ire,
  And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
  Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined,
  He stood, and question'd thus his mighty mind:(275)

  "Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?
  Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall:
  Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
  Proclaim, his counsels are obey'd too late,
  Which timely follow'd but the former night,
  What numbers had been saved by Hector's flight?
  That wise advice rejected with disdain,
  I feel my folly in my people slain.
  Methinks my suffering country's voice I hear,
  But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
  On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
  And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
  No--if I e'er return, return I must
  Glorious, my country's terror laid in dust:
  Or if I perish, let her see me fall
  In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
  And yet suppose these measures I forego,
  Approach unarm'd, and parley with the foe,
  The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down.
  And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
  The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain'd
  (Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
  With honourable justice to restore:
  And add half Ilion's yet remaining store,
  Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
  May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
  But why this thought? Unarm'd if I should go,
  What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
  But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
  We greet not here, as man conversing man,
  Met at an oak, or journeying o'er a plain;
  No season now for calm familiar talk,
  Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
  War is our business, but to whom is given
  To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!"

  Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
  His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
  The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
  Shot trembling rays that glitter'd o'er the land;
  And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
  Like Jove's own lightning, or the rising sun.
  As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
  Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
  He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
  Achilles follows like the winged wind.
  Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies
  (The swiftest racer of the liquid skies),
  Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,
  Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way,
  With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,
  And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings:
  No less fore-right the rapid chase they held,
  One urged by fury, one by fear impell'd:
  Now circling round the walls their course maintain,
  Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;
  Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,
  (A wider compass,) smoke along the road.
  Next by Scamander's double source they bound,
  Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground;
  This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,
  With exhalations steaming to the skies;
  That the green banks in summer's heat o'erflows,
  Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:
  Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills,
  Whose polish'd bed receives the falling rills;
  Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarm'd by Greece)
  Wash'd their fair garments in the days of peace.(276)
  By these they pass'd, one chasing, one in flight:
  (The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:)
  Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,
  No vulgar victim must reward the day:
  (Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)
  The prize contended was great Hector's life.
  As when some hero's funerals are decreed
  In grateful honour of the mighty dead;
  Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame
  (Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)
  The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal,
  And with them turns the raised spectator's soul:
  Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
  The gazing gods lean forward from the sky;
  To whom, while eager on the chase they look,
  The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

  "Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
  Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
  My heart partakes the generous Hector's pain;
  Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
  Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
  From Ida's summits, and the towers of Troy:
  Now see him flying; to his fears resign'd,
  And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
  Consult, ye powers! ('tis worthy your debate)
  Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
  Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
  (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

  Then Pallas thus: "Shall he whose vengeance forms
  The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
  Shall he prolong one Trojan's forfeit breath?
  A man, a mortal, pre-ordain'd to death!
  And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
  No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?"

  "Go then (return'd the sire) without delay,
  Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.
  Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
  And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

  As through the forest, o'er the vale and lawn,
  The well-breath'd beagle drives the flying fawn,
  In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
  Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
  Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
  The certain hound his various maze pursues.
  Thus step by step, where'er the Trojan wheel'd,
  There swift Achilles compass'd round the field.
  Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
  And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
  (Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
  From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
  So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
  He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
  As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
  One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
  Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
  Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
  No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
  While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

  What god, O muse, assisted Hector's force
  With fate itself so long to hold the course?
  Phoebus it was; who, in his latest hour,
  Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power:
  And great Achilles, lest some Greek's advance
  Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance,
  Sign'd to the troops to yield his foe the way,
  And leave untouch'd the honours of the day.

  Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
  The fates of mortal men, and things below:
  Here each contending hero's lot he tries,
  And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
  Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector's fate;
  Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.

  Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
  To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
  "O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
  And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
  Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
  Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
  Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
  Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
  See, where in vain he supplicates above,
  Roll'd at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
  Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
  And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun."

  Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
  Obey'd; and rested, on his lance reclined
  While like Deiphobus the martial dame
  (Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
  In show an aid, by hapless Hector's side
  Approach'd, and greets him thus with voice belied:

  "Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
  Of this distress, and sorrow'd in thy flight:
  It fits us now a noble stand to make,
  And here, as brothers, equal fates partake."

  Then he: "O prince! allied in blood and fame,
  Dearer than all that own a brother's name;
  Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
  Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more!
  Since you, of all our numerous race alone
  Defend my life, regardless of your own."

  Again the goddess: "Much my father's prayer,
  And much my mother's, press'd me to forbear:
  My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay,
  But stronger love impell'd, and I obey.
  Come then, the glorious conflict let us try,
  Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;
  Or let us stretch Achilles on the field,
  Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield."

  Fraudful she said; then swiftly march'd before:
  The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
  Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke:
  His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:

  "Enough, O son of Peleus! Troy has view'd
  Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
  But now some god within me bids me try
  Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.
  Yet on the verge of battle let us stay,
  And for a moment's space suspend the day;
  Let Heaven's high powers be call'd to arbitrate
  The just conditions of this stern debate,
  (Eternal witnesses of all below,
  And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!)
  To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,
  Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life,
  No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;
  Stripp'd of its arms alone (the conqueror's due)
  The rest to Greece uninjured I'll restore:
  Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more."

  "Talk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies,
  While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes),
  Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
  Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:
  Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine,
  Such leagues as men and furious lions join,
  To such I call the gods! one constant state
  Of lasting rancour and eternal hate:
  No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife,
  Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life.
  Rouse then thy forces this important hour,
  Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
  No further subterfuge, no further chance;
  'Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
  Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,
  Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death."

  He spoke, and launch'd his javelin at the foe;
  But Hector shunn'd the meditated blow:
  He stoop'd, while o'er his head the flying spear
  Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
  Minerva watch'd it falling on the land,
  Then drew, and gave to great Achilles' hand,
  Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
  Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

  "The life you boasted to that javelin given,
  Prince! you have miss'd. My fate depends on Heaven,
  To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
  Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
  Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
  And with false terrors sink another's mind.
  But know, whatever fate I am to try,
  By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
  I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
  My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
  But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
  End all my country's woes, deep buried in thy heart."

  The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
  Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell'd
  The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
  From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
  Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
  Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
  He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear--
  In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
  All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
  "'Tis so--Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
  I deem'd Deiphobus had heard my call,
  But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
  A god deceived me; Pallas, 'twas thy deed,
  Death and black fate approach! 'tis I must bleed.
  No refuge now, no succour from above,
  Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
  Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
  'Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:
  Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
  Let future ages hear it, and admire!"

  Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
  And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
  So Jove's bold bird, high balanced in the air,
  Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
  Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
  Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
  Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
  The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
  Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
  And as he moved, his figure seem'd on flame.
  As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,(277)
  Far-beaming o'er the silver host of night,
  When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
  So shone the point of great Achilles' spear.
  In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
  Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
  But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
  Securely cased the warrior's body o'er.
  One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
  Where 'twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
  Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
  Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
  Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
  Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
  Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
  While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

  "At last is Hector stretch'd upon the plain,
  Who fear'd no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
  Then, prince! you should have fear'd, what now you feel;
  Achilles absent was Achilles still:
  Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
  Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
  Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn'd,
  For ever honour'd, and for ever mourn'd:
  While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
  Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour."

  Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
  "By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
  By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
  Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
  The common rites of sepulture bestow,
  To soothe a father's and a mother's woe:
  Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
  And Hector's ashes in his country rest."

  "No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
  (Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
  Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare,
  Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
  Could I myself the bloody banquet join!
  No--to the dogs that carcase I resign.
  Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store,
  And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
  Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,
  Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame:
  Their Hector on the pile they should not see,
  Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee."

  Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:
  "Thy rage, implacable! too well I knew:
  The Furies that relentless breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.
  Yet think, a day will come, when fate's decree
  And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
  Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
  And stretch thee here before the Scaean gate."(278)

  He ceased. The Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
  And his eyes stiffen'd at the hand of death;
  To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,
  (The manly body left a load of clay,)
  And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Achilles, musing as he roll'd his eyes
  O'er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
  "Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
  I follow thee"--He said, and stripp'd the slain.
  Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
  The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
  The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
  His manly beauty and superior size;
  While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
  With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

  "How changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
  Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatter'd fate!"

  High o'er the slain the great Achilles stands,
  Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
  And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
  "Princes and leaders! countrymen and friends!
  Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
  The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
  Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers!
  See, if already their deserted towers
  Are left unmann'd; or if they yet retain
  The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
  But what is Troy, or glory what to me?
  Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,
  Divine Patroclus! Death hath seal'd his eyes;
  Unwept, unhonour'd, uninterr'd he lies!
  Can his dear image from my soul depart,
  Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?
  If in the melancholy shades below,
  The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,
  Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay'd,
  Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
  Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
  The corpse of Hector, and your paeans sing.
  Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
  "Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more."

  Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;
  (Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;)
  The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound;
  These fix'd up high behind the rolling wain,
  His graceful head was trail'd along the plain.
  Proud on his car the insulting victor stood,
  And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
  He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies;
  The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
  Now lost is all that formidable air;
  The face divine, and long-descending hair,
  Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand;
  Deform'd, dishonour'd, in his native land,
  Given to the rage of an insulting throng,
  And, in his parents' sight, now dragg'd along!

  The mother first beheld with sad survey;
  She rent her tresses, venerable grey,
  And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
  With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans,
  While the sad father answers groans with groans
  Tears after tears his mournful cheeks o'erflow,
  And the whole city wears one face of woe:
  No less than if the rage of hostile fires.
  From her foundations curling to her spires,
  O'er the proud citadel at length should rise,
  And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
  The wretched monarch of the falling state,
  Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
  Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,
  While strong affliction gives the feeble force:
  Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro,
  In all the raging impotence of woe.
  At length he roll'd in dust, and thus begun,
  Imploring all, and naming one by one:
  "Ah! let me, let me go where sorrow calls;
  I, only I, will issue from your walls
  (Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none),
  And bow before the murderer of my son.
  My grief perhaps his pity may engage;
  Perhaps at least he may respect my age.
  He has a father too; a man like me;
  One, not exempt from age and misery
  (Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
  Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
  How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
  Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb!
  Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
  Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
  O had thy gentle spirit pass'd in peace,
  The son expiring in the sire's embrace,
  While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
  And, bending o'er thee, mix'd the tender shower!
  Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
  To melt in full satiety of grief!"

  Thus wail'd the father, grovelling on the ground,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream'd around.

  Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
  (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
  "Ah why has Heaven prolong'd this hated breath,
  Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
  O Hector! late thy parents' pride and joy,
  The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
  To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
  Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
  O fatal change! become in one sad day
  A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

  But not as yet the fatal news had spread
  To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
  As yet no messenger had told his fate,
  Not e'en his stay without the Scaean gate.
  Far in the close recesses of the dome,
  Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
  A growing work employ'd her secret hours,
  Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
  Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
  The bath preparing for her lord's return
  In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
  Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
  Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
  And all her members shake with sudden fear:
  Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls,
  And thus, astonish'd, to her maids she calls:

                        [Illustration: THE BATH.]

                                THE BATH.


  "Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise
  Invades my ear? 'Tis sure my mother's voice.
  My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,
  A pulse unusual flutters at my heart;
  Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate
  (Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
  Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
  But much I fear my Hector's dauntless breast
  Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain,
  Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
  Safe in the crowd he ever scorn'd to wait,
  And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:
  Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath,
  Now quench'd for ever in the arms of death."

  She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace,
  Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,
  Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),
  And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
  Too soon her eyes the killing object found,
  The godlike Hector dragg'd along the ground.
  A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:
  She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
  Her hair's fair ornaments, the braids that bound,
  The net that held them, and the wreath that crown'd,
  The veil and diadem flew far away
  (The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
  Around a train of weeping sisters stands,
  To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
  Scarce from the verge of death recall'd, again
  She faints, or but recovers to complain.

             [Illustration: ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.]

                     ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.


  "O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
  Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
  For sure one star its baneful beam display'd
  On Priam's roof, and Hippoplacia's shade.
  From different parents, different climes we came.
  At different periods, yet our fate the same!
  Why was my birth to great Aetion owed,
  And why was all that tender care bestow'd?
  Would I had never been!--O thou, the ghost
  Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only child, once comfort of my pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
  To help him now! no father to defend!
  For should he 'scape the sword, the common doom,
  What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
  Even from his own paternal roof expell'd,
  Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
  The day, that to the shades the father sends,
  Robs the sad orphan of his father's friends:
  He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
  For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
  Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
  Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
  While those his father's former bounty fed
  Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
  The kindest but his present wants allay,
  To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
  Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
  Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
  Shall cry, 'Begone! thy father feasts not here:'
  The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
  Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
  To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
  Forced by repeated insults to return,
  And to his widow'd mother vainly mourn:
  He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
  With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
  And when still evening gave him up to rest,
  Sunk soft in down upon the nurse's breast,
  Must--ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
  Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,(279)
  Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
  Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.
  But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air,
  Far from thy parents' and thy consort's care;
  Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,
  The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
  Now to devouring flames be these a prey,
  Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
  Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,
  An honour to the living, not the dead!"

  So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear,
  Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear.





BOOK XXIII.


ARGUMENT.

FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.(280)

Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus. After the
funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep, the
ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of burial; the
next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons to fetch wood
for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering their hair to the
dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly twelve Trojan
captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He pays libations to the
Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise the flames. When
the pile has burned all night, they gather the bones, place them in an urn
of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutes the funeral games: the
chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the wrestling, the foot-race, the
single combat, the discus, the shooting with arrows, the darting the
javelin: the various descriptions of which, and the various success of the
several antagonists, make the greatest part of the book.

In this book ends the thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost of
Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is employed in
felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth in burning it; and
the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene is generally on the
sea-shore.

  Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train
  Through the sad city mourn'd her hero slain.
  The body soil'd with dust, and black with gore,
  Lies on broad Hellespont's resounding shore.
  The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
  All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
  These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
  And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

  "Not yet, my brave companions of the war,
  Release your smoking coursers from the car;
  But, with his chariot each in order led,
  Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
  Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
  Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief."

  The troops obey'd; and thrice in order led(281)
  (Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
  And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
  Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
  For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
  Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
  But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
  Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes:
  His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid
  On his dead friend's cold breast, and thus he said:

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour'd ghost
  Hear, and rejoice on Pluto's dreary coast;
  Behold! Achilles' promise is complete;
  The bloody Hector stretch'd before thy feet.
  Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;
  And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,
  Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire;
  Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre."

  Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
  Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,
  Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around
  Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
  All to Achilles' sable ship repair,
  Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
  Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,
  The bristly victims hissing o'er the fire:
  The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
  Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
  Around the hero's prostrate body flow'd,
  In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
  And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
  The glorious victor to the king of kings.
  From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
  With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
  The attending heralds, as by office bound,
  With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
  To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
  They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:(282)

  "No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
  The first and greatest of the gods above!
  Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
  The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
  Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
  And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
  Howe'er, reluctant as I am, I stay
  And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
  (O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
  That Greece the warrior's funeral pile prepare,
  And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
  To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
  Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
  Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire."

  He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
  The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
  Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
  But great Pelides, stretch'd along the shore,
  Where, dash'd on rocks, the broken billows roar,
  Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
  The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
  Along the grass his languid members fall,
  Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
  Hush'd by the murmurs of the rolling deep,
  At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.
  When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes,
  Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem'd to rise:
  In the same robe he living wore, he came:
  In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
  The form familiar hover'd o'er his head,
  "And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:)
  Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
  Living, I seem'd his dearest, tenderest care,
  But now forgot, I wander in the air.
  Let my pale corse the rites of burial know,
  And give me entrance in the realms below:
  Till then the spirit finds no resting-place,
  But here and there the unbodied spectres chase
  The vagrant dead around the dark abode,
  Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
  Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore
  When once we pass, the soul returns no more:
  When once the last funereal flames ascend,
  No more shall meet Achilles and his friend;
  No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;
  Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
  Me fate has sever'd from the sons of earth,
  The fate fore-doom'd that waited from my birth:
  Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall
  Even great and godlike thou art doom'd to fall.
  Hear then; and as in fate and love we join,
  Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!
  Together have we lived; together bred,
  One house received us, and one table fed;
  That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
  May mix our ashes in one common grave."

  "And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight(283)
  Once more return'st thou from the realms of night?
  O more than brother! Think each office paid,
  Whate'er can rest a discontented shade;
  But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
  Afford at least that melancholy joy."

  He said, and with his longing arms essay'd
  In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
  Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,(284)
  And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
  Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
  Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
  Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

  "'Tis true, 'tis certain; man, though dead, retains
  Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
  The form subsists without the body's aid,
  Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
  This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
  Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
  Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

  Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
  And now the rosy-finger'd morn appears,
  Shows every mournful face with tears o'erspread,
  And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
  But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
  With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
  To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
  A charge consign'd to Merion's faithful care.
  With proper instruments they take the road,
  Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
  First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
  O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
  Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound
  But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods,(286)
  (Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods,)
  Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
  On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
  Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
  Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
  The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
  And the slow mules the same rough road return
  The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore
  (Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
  There on the spot which great Achilles show'd,
  They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;
  Circling around the place, where times to come
  Shall view Patroclus' and Achilles' tomb.
  The hero bids his martial troops appear
  High on their cars in all the pomp of war;
  Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires,
  All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
  The chariots first proceed, a shining train;
  Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain;
  Next these the melancholy band appear;
  Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier;
  O'er all the corse their scattered locks they throw;
  Achilles next, oppress'd with mighty woe,
  Supporting with his hands the hero's head,
  Bends o'er the extended body of the dead.
  Patroclus decent on the appointed ground
  They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
  But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
  And from his head divides the yellow hair;
  Those curling locks which from his youth he vow'd,(287)
  And sacred grew, to Sperchius' honour'd flood:
  Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,
  And roll'd his eyes around the watery waste:

  "Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost
  Delightful roll along my native coast!
  To whom we vainly vow'd, at our return,
  These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
  Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
  Where to the day thy silver fountains rise,
  And where in shade of consecrated bowers
  Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
  So vow'd my father, but he vow'd in vain;
  No more Achilles sees his native plain;
  In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
  Patroclus bears them to the shades below."

  Thus o'er Patroclus while the hero pray'd,
  On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
  Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow:
  And now the sun had set upon their woe;
  But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
  "Enough, Atrides! give the troops relief:
  Permit the mourning legions to retire,
  And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
  The pious care be ours, the dead to burn--"
  He said: the people to their ships return:
  While those deputed to inter the slain
  Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.(288)
  A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
  The growing structure spreads on every side;
  High on the top the manly corse they lay,
  And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
  Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
  And the piled victims round the body spread;
  Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
  Suspends around, low-bending o'er the pile.
  Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
  Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
  Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
  Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
  Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
  Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.(289)
  On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
  Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
  Smear'd with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
  And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:(290)

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
  Hear, and exult, on Pluto's dreary coast.
  Behold Achilles' promise fully paid,
  Twelve Trojan heroes offer'd to thy shade;
  But heavier fates on Hector's corse attend,
  Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend."

  So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
  His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
  Celestial Venus hover'd o'er his head,
  And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
  She watch'd him all the night and all the day,
  And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
  Nor sacred Phoebus less employ'd his care;
  He pour'd around a veil of gather'd air,
  And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
  Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.

              [Illustration: THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.]

                      THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.


  Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
  Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise;
  But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,
  Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air,
  And victims promised, and libations cast,
  To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:
  He call'd the aerial powers, along the skies
  To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.
  The winged Iris heard the hero's call,
  And instant hasten'd to their airy hall,
  Where in old Zephyr's open courts on high,
  Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
  She shone amidst them, on her painted bow;
  The rocky pavement glitter'd with the show.
  All from the banquet rise, and each invites
  The various goddess to partake the rites.
  "Not so (the dame replied), I haste to go
  To sacred Ocean, and the floods below:
  Even now our solemn hecatombs attend,
  And heaven is feasting on the world's green end
  With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)
  Far on the extremest limits of the main.
  But Peleus' son entreats, with sacrifice,
  The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
  Let on Patroclus' pile your blast be driven,
  And bear the blazing honours high to heaven."

  Swift as the word she vanish'd from their view;
  Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
  Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
  And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss'd before.
  To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
  The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
  Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
  Till on the pile the gather'd tempest falls.
  The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
  And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
  All night Achilles hails Patroclus' soul,
  With large libations from the golden bowl.
  As a poor father, helpless and undone,
  Mourns o'er the ashes of an only son,
  Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
  And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
  So stay'd Achilles, circling round the shore,
  So watch'd the flames, till now they flame no more.
  'Twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
  The morning planet told the approach of light;
  And, fast behind, Aurora's warmer ray
  O'er the broad ocean pour'd the golden day:
  Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burn'd,
  And to their caves the whistling winds return'd:
  Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
  The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

  Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
  And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
  Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
  Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
  The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
  Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

  "Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
  First let us quench the yet remaining flame
  With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
  The hero's bones with careful view select:
  (Apart, and easy to be known they lie
  Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
  The rest around the margin will be seen
  Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
  These wrapp'd in double cauls of fat, prepare;
  And in the golden vase dispose with care;
  There let them rest with decent honour laid,
  Till I shall follow to the infernal shade.
  Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,
  A common structure on the humble sands:
  Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,
  And late posterity record our praise!"

  The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,
  Wide o'er the pile the sable wine they throw,
  And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
  Next the white bones his sad companions place,
  With tears collected, in the golden vase.
  The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
  The urn a veil of linen covered o'er.
  That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
  And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
  High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
  Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.

  The swarming populace the chief detains,
  And leads amidst a wide extent of plains;
  There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds
  A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds,
  Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),
  Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
  First stood the prizes to reward the force
  Of rapid racers in the dusty course:
  A woman for the first, in beauty's bloom,
  Skill'd in the needle, and the labouring loom;
  And a large vase, where two bright handles rise,
  Of twenty measures its capacious size.
  The second victor claims a mare unbroke,
  Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:
  The third, a charger yet untouch'd by flame;
  Four ample measures held the shining frame:
  Two golden talents for the fourth were placed:
  An ample double bowl contents the last.
  These in fair order ranged upon the plain,
  The hero, rising, thus address'd the train:

  "Behold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
  To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
  Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
  Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
  (A race unrivall'd, which from ocean's god
  Peleus received, and on his son bestow'd.)
  But this no time our vigour to display;
  Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
  Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
  Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
  Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
  And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
  Let others for the noble task prepare,
  Who trust the courser and the flying car."

  Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
  But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
  Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
  And skill'd to manage the high-bounding steed.
  With equal ardour bold Tydides swell'd,
  The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compell'd
  (Which late obey'd the Dardan chiefs command,
  When scarce a god redeem'd him from his hand).
  Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
  And the famed courser of the king of kings:
  Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
  To 'scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
  (Cthe her name) at home to end his days;
  Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
  Next him Antilochus demands the course
  With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
  Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
  Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
  Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
  The prudent son with unattending ears.

  "My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
  The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless'd;
  Neptune and Jove on thee conferr'd the skill
  Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
  To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
  But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
  Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
  Compare those rivals' judgment and thy own:
  It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
  And to be swift is less than to be wise.
  'Tis more by art than force of numerous strokes
  The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;
  By art the pilot, through the boiling deep
  And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship;
  And 'tis the artist wins the glorious course;
  Not those who trust in chariots and in horse.
  In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,
  And short, or wide, the ungovern'd courser drive:
  While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds,
  The knowing racer to his end proceeds;
  Fix'd on the goal his eye foreruns the course,
  His hand unerring steers the steady horse,
  And now contracts, or now extends the rein,
  Observing still the foremost on the plain.
  Mark then the goal, 'tis easy to be found;
  Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;
  Of some once stately oak the last remains,
  Or hardy fir, unperish'd with the rains:
  Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar;
  And round, a circle for the wheeling car.
  (Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;
  Or then, as now, the limit of a race.)
  Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
  A little bending to the left-hand steed;
  But urge the right, and give him all the reins;
  While thy strict hand his fellow's head restrains,
  And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
  The wheel's round naves appear to brush the goal.
  Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse)
  Clear of the stony heap direct the course;
  Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be
  A joy to others, a reproach to me.
  So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind,
  And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:
  Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed
  Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;
  Or the famed race, through all the regions known,
  That whirl'd the car of proud Laomedon."

  Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage
  Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
  Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
  The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
  They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
  (Roll'd in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
  Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
  And next the brother of the king of men:
  Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
  And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
  They stand in order, an impatient train:
  Pelides points the barrier on the plain,
  And sends before old Phoenix to the place,
  To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
  At once the coursers from the barrier bound;
  The lifted scourges all at once resound;
  Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before;
  And up the champaign thunder from the shore:
  Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,
  And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies;
  Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,
  Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind:
  The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,
  Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground.
  While hot for fame, and conquest all their care,
  (Each o'er his flying courser hung in air,)
  Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein,
  They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
  Now (the last compass fetch'd around the goal)
  At the near prize each gathers all his soul,
  Each burns with double hope, with double pain,
  Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
  First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;
  With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds:
  Close on Eumelus' back they puff the wind,
  And seem just mounting on his car behind;
  Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
  And, hovering o'er, their stretching shadows sees.
  Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
  But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
  Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
  His matchless horses' labour on the plain.
  Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
  Snatch'd from his hope the glories of the day.
  The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
  Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
  And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
  She breaks his rival's chariot from the yoke:
  No more their way the startled horses held;
  The car reversed came rattling on the field;
  Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
  Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
  His batter'd face and elbows strike the ground;
  Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguish'd wound:
  Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
  Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
  Minerva's spirit drives his matchless pace,
  And crowns him victor of the labour'd race.

  The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
  While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
  "Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
  Not that we hope to match Tydides' horse,
  Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
  And gives their lord the honours of the day;
  But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
  Your swiftness? vanquish'd by a female foe?
  Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
  The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
  No more shall Nestor's hand your food supply,
  The old man's fury rises, and ye die.
  Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
  Presents the occasion, could we use it right."

  Thus he. The coursers at their master's threat
  With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
  And now Antilochus with nice survey
  Observes the compass of the hollow way.
  'Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn,
  Fast by the road a precipice was worn:
  Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng
  The Spartan hero's chariot smoked along.
  Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep,
  Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
  Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,
  And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
  "Hold, stay your steeds--What madness thus to ride
  This narrow way! take larger field (he cried),
  Or both must fall."--Atrides cried in vain;
  He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
  Far as an able arm the disk can send,
  When youthful rivals their full force extend,
  So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew
  Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew
  His horse compell'd; foreboding in his fears
  The rattling ruin of the clashing cars,
  The floundering coursers rolling on the plain,
  And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
  But thus upbraids his rival as he flies:
  "Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
  Go, but expect not I'll the prize resign;
  Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine--"
  Then to his steeds with all his force he cries,
  "Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
  Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,
  With fainting knees shall labour in the course,
  And yield the glory yours."--The steeds obey;
  Already at their heels they wing their way,
  And seem already to retrieve the day.

  Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
  The coursers bounding o'er the dusty field.
  The first who mark'd them was the Cretan king;
  High on a rising ground, above the ring,
  The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
  He well observed the chief who led the way,
  And heard from far his animating cries,
  And saw the foremost steed with sharpen'd eyes;
  On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,
  Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
  He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
  "Are yonder horse discern'd by me alone?
  Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
  And other steeds than lately led the way?
  Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
  Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
  For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
  I search to find them, but I search in vain.
  Perchance the reins forsook the driver's hand,
  And, turn'd too short, he tumbled on the strand,
  Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
  With frantic fury from the destined way.
  Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
  For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
  Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
  The great Ctolian chief, renown'd in war."

  "Old man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
  Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
  Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
  Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
  Eumelus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Still, as at first, unrivall'd lead the race:
  I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
  And hear his shouts victorious o'er the plain."

  Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin'd:
  "Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
  Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
  The last in merit, as the first in pride!
  To vile reproach what answer can we make?
  A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
  And be the king the judge. The most unwise
  Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
  Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
  To fell extremes. But Thetis' godlike son
  Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

  "Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
  Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
  And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end."
  No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
  Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
  High o'er his head the circling lash he wields:
  His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
  His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll'd,
  Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
  Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
  The track his flying wheels had left behind:
  And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
  So swift, it seem'd a flight, and not a race.
  Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
  Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
  From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
  The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
  With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
  The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
  These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
  The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

  Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
  O'erpass'd Atrides) second in the course.
  Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near
  Than to the courser in his swift career
  The following car, just touching with his heel
  And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:
  Such, and so narrow now the space between
  The rivals, late so distant on the green;
  So soon swift Cthe her lost ground regain'd,
  One length, one moment, had the race obtain'd.

  Merion pursued, at greater distance still,
  With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
  Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;
  Slow dragged the steeds his batter'd chariot on:
  Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:

  "Behold! the man whose matchless art surpass'd
  The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
  Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay
  (Since great Tydides bears the first away)
  To him the second honours of the day."

  The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,
  And then Eumelus had received the prize,
  But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,
  The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
  "Think not (he cries) I tamely will resign,
  O Peleus' son! the mare so justly mine.
  What if the gods, the skilful to confound,
  Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
  Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice,
  And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
  If yet (distinction to thy friend to show,
  And please a soul desirous to bestow)
  Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store
  Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;
  An ample present let him thence receive,
  And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
  But this my prize I never shall forego;
  This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe."

  Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;
  Pleased with the well-turn'd flattery of a friend,
  Achilles smiled: "The gift proposed (he cried),
  Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
  With plates of brass the corslet cover'd o'er,
  (The same renown'd Asteropaeus wore,)
  Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine,
  (No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine."

  He said: Automedon at his command
  The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
  Distinguish'd by his friend, his bosom glows
  With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
  The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
  And still'd the clamour of the shouting bands.
  Not without cause incensed at Nestor's son,
  And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

  "The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
  An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain'd.
  Robb'd of my glory and my just reward,
  To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
  So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
  Or judge me envious of a rival's fame.
  But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
  What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
  What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
  And vindicate by oath th' ill-gotten prize?
  Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
  The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
  And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
  Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
  Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
  The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!"

  The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
  Then mildly thus: "Excuse, if youth have err'd;
  Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
  Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
  Thou know'st the errors of unripen'd age,
  Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
  The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
  The mare, or aught thou ask'st, be freely thine
  Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
  Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn."

  So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
  The mare contested to the king restored.
  Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
  Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
  The fields their vegetable life renew,
  And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
  Such joy the Spartan's shining face o'erspread,
  And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

  "Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree
  'Tis now Atrides' turn to yield to thee.
  Rash heat perhaps a moment might control,
  Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
  Not but (my friend) 'tis still the wiser way
  To waive contention with superior sway;
  For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
  Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
  To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
  Suffice thy father's merit and thy own:
  Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
  Have greatly suffer'd, and have greatly done.
  I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
  Nor is my pride preferr'd before my friend."

  He said; and pleased his passion to command,
  Resign'd the courser to Noemon's hand,
  Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,
  The shining charger to his vessel sent.
  The golden talents Merion next obtain'd;
  The fifth reward, the double bowl, remain'd.
  Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
  And thus the purpose of his gift declares:
  "Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)
  In dear memorial of Patroclus dead;
  Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
  For ever snatch'd from our desiring eyes!
  Take thou this token of a grateful heart,
  Though 'tis not thine to hurl the distant dart,
  The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield,
  Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:
  Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown,
  But left the glory of the past thy own."

  He said, and placed the goblet at his side;
  With joy the venerable king replied:

  "Wisely and well, my son, thy words have proved
  A senior honour'd, and a friend beloved!
  Too true it is, deserted of my strength,
  These wither'd arms and limbs have fail'd at length.
  Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore,
  Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
  Victorious then in every solemn game,
  Ordain'd to Amarynces' mighty name;
  The brave Epeians gave my glory way,
  Ctolians, Pylians, all resign'd the day.
  I quell'd Clytomedes in fights of hand,
  And backward hurl'd Ancaeus on the sand,
  Surpass'd Iphyclus in the swift career,
  Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
  The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
  But won by numbers, not by art or force:
  For the famed twins, impatient to survey
  Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
  Sprung to their car; and with united pains
  One lash'd the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
  Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
  A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
  I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
  Though once the foremost hero of the field.
  Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
  With martial honours decorate the dead:
  While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
  (Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
  Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
  Not one but honours sacred age and me:
  Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
  May the just gods return another day!"

  Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
  Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

  The prizes next are order'd to the field,
  For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
  A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
  Of six years' age, unconscious of the yoke,
  Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
  Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
  Achilles rising, thus: "Let Greece excite
  Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
  Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
  And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
  On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
  And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
  This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
  The vanquish'd bear the massy bowl away."

  This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;(291)
  High o'er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
  And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
  "Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
  (Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
  This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
  Others, 'tis own'd, in fields of battle shine,
  But the first honours of this fight are mine;
  For who excels in all? Then let my foe
  Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
  Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
  Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
  So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
  To heave the batter'd carcase off the plain."

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
  'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
  To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
  The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
  In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
  (The games ordain'd dead OEdipus to grace,)
  And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
  Him great Tydides urges to contend,
  Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
  Officious with the cincture girds him round;
  And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
  Amid the circle now each champion stands,
  And poises high in air his iron hands;
  With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
  Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
  And painful sweat from all their members flows.
  At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
  Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
  Beneath that ponderous arm's resistless sway
  Down dropp'd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
  As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
  By some huge billow dash'd against the shore,
  Lies panting; not less batter'd with his wound,
  The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
  To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
  Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
  Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
  And dragging his disabled legs along;
  Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o'er;
  His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;(292)
  Wrapp'd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
  His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

  The third bold game Achilles next demands,
  And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
  A massy tripod for the victor lies,
  Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
  And next, the loser's spirits to restore,
  A female captive, valued but at four.
  Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
  When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
  Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
  Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
  Close lock'd above, their heads and arms are mix'd:
  Below, their planted feet at distance fix'd;
  Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
  Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
  Their tops connected, but at wider space
  Fix'd on the centre stands their solid base.
  Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
  The humid sweat from every pore descends;
  Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
  Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
  Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown'd,
  O'erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
  Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
  The watchful caution of his artful foe.
  While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
  Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
  "Or let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
  Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree."

  He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
  With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
  The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
  His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
  Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
  Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
  Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
  He barely stirr'd him, but he could not raise:
  His knee lock'd fast, the foe's attempt denied;
  And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
  Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
  Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
  Again they rage, again to combat rise;
  When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

  "Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
  Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
  Ye both have won: let others who excel,
  Now prove that prowess you have proved so well."

  The hero's words the willing chiefs obey,
  From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
  And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

  And now succeed the gifts ordain'd to grace
  The youths contending in the rapid race:
  A silver urn that full six measures held,
  By none in weight or workmanship excell'd:
  Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
  Elaborate, with artifice divine;
  Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
  And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
  From him descended, good Eunaeus heir'd
  The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
  To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
  Now, the same hero's funeral rites to grace,
  It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
  A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
  And half a talent must content the last.
  Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
  "Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
  Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

  The hero said, and starting from his place,
  Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
  Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass'd
  His youthful equals, Nestor's son, the last.
  Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
  Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
  All start at once; Oileus led the race;
  The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
  Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
  As closely following as the running thread
  The spindle follows, and displays the charms
  Of the fair spinster's breast and moving arms:
  Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
  And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
  His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
  The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
  To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
  And send their souls before him as he flies.
  Now three times turn'd in prospect of the goal,
  The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray'd!
  And present at his thought descends the maid.
  Buoy'd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
  All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
  (O'erturn'd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
  Was clogg'd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
  (The self-same place beside Patroclus' pyre,
  Where late the slaughter'd victims fed the fire.)
  Besmear'd with filth, and blotted o'er with clay,
  Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
  The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
  And left the urn Ulysses' rich reward.
  Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
  The baffled hero thus the Greeks address'd:

  "Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
  A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
  She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
  And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

  Thus sourly wail'd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
  A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
  Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
  Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
  The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
  Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
  He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
  (A green old age unconscious of decays,
  That proves the hero born in better days!)
  Behold his vigour in this active race!
  Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
  For who can match Achilles? He who can,
  Must yet be more than hero, more than man."

  The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
  "Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
  Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll'd;
  Receive a talent of the purest gold."
  The youth departs content. The host admire
  The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

  Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
  Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
  Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
  And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
  "Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
  Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
  Now grace the lists before our army's sight,
  And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
  Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
  And stain his rival's mail with issuing gore,
  The sword Asteropaeus possess'd of old,
  (A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
  Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker's side:
  These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
  For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
  A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends."

  Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus' son,
  And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
  Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
  The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
  Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
  Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
  Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
  But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew'd.
  A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
  Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay'd.
  Not thus the foe: his javelin aim'd above
  The buckler's margin, at the neck he drove.
  But Greece, now trembling for her hero's life,
  Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
  Yet still the victor's due Tydides gains,
  With him the sword and studded belt remains.

  Then hurl'd the hero, thundering on the ground,
  A mass of iron (an enormous round),
  Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
  Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
  And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
  The giant by Achilles slain, he stow'd
  Among his spoils this memorable load.
  For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
  "Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
  Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
  If he be one enrich'd with large domain
  Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
  Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
  His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
  From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city's aid
  For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

  Stern Polypoetes stepp'd before the throng,
  And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
  Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
  Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
  Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
  High o'er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
  Leonteus next a little space surpass'd;
  And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
  O'er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
  From Polypoetes' arm the discus sung:
  Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
  That distant falls among the grazing cows,
  So past them all the rapid circle flies:
  His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
  With force conjoin'd heave off the weighty prize.

  Those, who in skilful archery contend,
  He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
  And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
  Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
  The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
  The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
  To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
  The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

  "Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
  These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
  The single, he whose shaft divides the cord."
  He said: experienced Merion took the word;
  And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
  Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
  Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
  But flies unbless'd! No grateful sacrifice,
  No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
  To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
  For this, thy well-aim'd arrow turn'd aside,
  Err'd from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
  Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
  And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
  Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
  And Merion eager meditates the wound:
  He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
  And following with his eye the soaring dove,
  Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
  With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific
  The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
  Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
  Quite through and through the point its passage found,
  And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
  The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
  With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
  A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
  Then sudden dropp'd, and left her life in air.
  From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
  And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

  To close the funeral games, Achilles last
  A massy spear amid the circle placed,
  And ample charger of unsullied frame,
  With flowers high-wrought, not blacken'd yet by flame.
  For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
  Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
  Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
  Nor here disdain'd the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

  Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector's body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentations of
Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the solemnities of the funeral.

The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of Hector
lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in the truce
allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in Achilles' camp, and
partly in Troy.

  Now from the finish'd games the Grecian band
  Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
  All stretch'd at ease the genial banquet share,
  And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
  Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign'd,
  His friend's dear image present to his mind,
  Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
  Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
  Restless he roll'd around his weary bed,
  And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
  The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
  That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
  What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
  What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
  All pass'd before him in remembrance dear,
  Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
  And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
  Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
  Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
  Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
  There as the solitary mourner raves,
  The ruddy morning rises o'er the waves:
  Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join'd!
  The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
  And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
  Was Hector dragg'd, then hurried to the tent.
  There sleep at last o'ercomes the hero's eyes;
  While foul in dust the unhonour'd carcase lies,
  But not deserted by the pitying skies:
  For Phoebus watch'd it with superior care,
  Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
  And, ignominious as it swept the field,
  Spread o'er the sacred corse his golden shield.
  All heaven was moved, and Hermes will'd to go
  By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
  But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
  And th' unrelenting empress of the skies,
  E'er since that day implacable to Troy,
  What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
  Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
  Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
  But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
  To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:

          [Illustration: HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.]

                  HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.


  "Unpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
  Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
  And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
  Still grudge his body to the Trojans' view?
  Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
  The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
  Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
  That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
  A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
  In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
  Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
  Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
  Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
  The greatest evil and the greatest good.
  Still for one loss he rages unresign'd,
  Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
  To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
  Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
  Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
  Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
  But this insatiate, the commission given
  By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
  Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
  Hector's dead earth, insensible of wrong!
  Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
  He violates the laws of man and god."

                  [Illustration: THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.]

                          THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.


  "If equal honours by the partial skies
  Are doom'd both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
  If Thetis' son must no distinction know,
  Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
  But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
  His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
  Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
  Springs from a goddess by a man's embrace
  (A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
  A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
  To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
  Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
  Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
  Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre."

  Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
  "Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
  Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
  But mine, and every god's peculiar grace
  Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
  Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
  (The only honours men to gods can pay,)
  Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
  The pure libation, and the holy feast:
  Howe'er by stealth to snatch the corse away,
  We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
  But haste, and summon to our courts above
  The azure queen; let her persuasion move
  Her furious son from Priam to receive
  The proffer'd ransom, and the corse to leave."

  He added not: and Iris from the skies,
  Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
  Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
  Refulgent gliding o'er the sable deeps.
  Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
  And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
  Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
  She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
  As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
  From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
  So pass'd the goddess through the closing wave,
  Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret cave:
  There placed amidst her melancholy train
  (The blue-hair'd sisters of the sacred main)
  Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
  And wept her godlike son's approaching doom.
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
  'Tis Jove that calls."--"And why (the dame replies)
  Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
  Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
  Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
  Howe'er, be heaven's almighty sire obey'd--"
  She spake, and veil'd her head in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest add this glory more.
  Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
  Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
  Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
  But yield to ransom and the father's prayer;
  The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
  With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
  Whate'er his honour asks, or heart demands."

  His word the silver-footed queen attends,
  And from Olympus' snowy tops descends.
  Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
  And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
  His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
  Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
  She press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

  "How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
  And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
  Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
  Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
  O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
  Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
  Lo! Jove himself (for Jove's command I bear)
  Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
  No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
  Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
  Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
  But yield to ransom, and restore the slain."

  To whom Achilles: "Be the ransom given,
  And we submit, since such the will of heaven."

  While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
  Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
  "Haste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
  And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
  Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
  Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
  Safe through the foe by our protection led:
  Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
  Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

     [Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.]

             IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.


  Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
  And swift at Priam's mournful court arrives:
  Where the sad sons beside their father's throne
  Sat bathed in tears, and answer'd groan with groan.
  And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
  (Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp'd attire
  Conceal'd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
  A shower of ashes o'er his neck and head.
  From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
  Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
  Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
  Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
  Before the king Jove's messenger appears,
  And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

  "Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
  From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
  For Hector's sake these walls he bids thee leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
  Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
  Safe through the foe by his protection led:
  Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

  She spoke, and vanish'd. Priam bids prepare
  His gentle mules and harness to the car;
  There, for the gifts, a polish'd casket lay:
  His pious sons the king's command obey.
  Then pass'd the monarch to his bridal-room,
  Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
  And where the treasures of his empire lay;
  Then call'd his queen, and thus began to say:

  "Unhappy consort of a king distress'd!
  Partake the troubles of thy husband's breast:
  I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
  Who bids me try Achilles' mind to move;
  Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
  The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
  Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
  Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe."

  The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
  Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
  "Ah! whither wanders thy distemper'd mind?
  And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
  Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
  Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
  Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
  (O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
  To view that deathful eye, and wander o'er
  Those hands yet red with Hector's noble gore!
  Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare.
  And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
  So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
  Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
  No--pent in this sad palace, let us give
  To grief the wretched days we have to live.
  Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
  Born to his own, and to his parents' woe!
  Doom'd from the hour his luckless life begun,
  To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus' son!
  Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
  My rage, and these barbarities repay!
  For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
  Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
  He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
  And fell a hero in his country's right."

  "Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
  With words of omen, like a bird of night,
  (Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
  Content--By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people's common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
  I see the ruins of your smoking town!
  O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
  A willing ghost to Pluto's dreary dome!"

  He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
  The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
  Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
  Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
  His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
  Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
  And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
  Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

  "Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
  Why did not all in Hector's cause expire?
  Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
  You, the disgrace of Priam's house, remain!
  Mestor the brave, renown'd in ranks of war,
  With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,(293)
  And last great Hector, more than man divine,
  For sure he seem'd not of terrestrial line!
  All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
  And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
  Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
  Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
  Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
  And speed my journey to redeem my son?"

  The sons their father's wretched age revere,
  Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
  High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
  The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
  Box was the yoke, emboss'd with costly pains,
  And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
  Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
  These to the chariot's polish'd pole they bound.
  Then fix'd a ring the running reins to guide,
  And close beneath the gather'd ends were tied.
  Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
  The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
  Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
  (The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
  But the fair horses, long his darling care,
  Himself received, and harness'd to his car:
  Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
  The hoary herald help'd him, at his side.
  While careful these the gentle coursers join'd,
  Sad Hecuba approach'd with anxious mind;
  A golden bowl that foam'd with fragrant wine,
  (Libation destined to the power divine,)
  Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
  And thus consigns it to the monarch's hands:

  "Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
  His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
  Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
  Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
  Pray to that god, who high on Ida's brow
  Surveys thy desolated realms below,
  His winged messenger to send from high,
  And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
  That sign beheld, and strengthen'd from above,
  Boldly pursue the journey mark'd by Jove:
  But if the god his augury denies,
  Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice."

  "'Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
  To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
  The purest water of the living spring:
  (Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
  Then took the golden cup his queen had fill'd;
  On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
  Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

  "O first and greatest! heaven's imperial lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored!
  To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
  And teach him mercy when a father prays.
  If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
  Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
  So shall thy suppliant, strengthen'd from above,
  Fearless pursue the journey mark'd by Jove."

  Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
  Despatch'd his bird, celestial augury!
  The swift-wing'd chaser of the feather'd game,
  And known to gods by Percnos' lofty name.
  Wide as appears some palace-gate display'd.
  So broad, his pinions stretch'd their ample shade,
  As stooping dexter with resounding wings
  The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
  A dawn of joy in every face appears:
  The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
  Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
  The brazen portal in his passage rung;
  The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
  Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
  The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
  And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
  On his slow wheels the following people wait,
  Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
  With hands uplifted eye him as he pass'd,
  And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
  Now forward fares the father on his way,
  Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
  Great Jove beheld him as he cross'd the plain,
  And felt the woes of miserable man.
  Then thus to Hermes: "Thou whose constant cares
  Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
  Behold an object to thy charge consign'd:
  If ever pity touch'd thee for mankind,
  Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
  And safe conduct him to Achilles' tent."

  The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
  O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main;
  Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
  Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
  Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
  Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

  The afflicted monarch shiver'd with despair;
  Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
  Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
  A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
  When Hermes, greeting, touch'd his royal hand,
  And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
  Is seal'd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
  Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
  Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
  What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
  These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
  For what defence, alas! could'st thou provide;
  Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
  Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
  From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
  From Greece I'll guard thee too; for in those lines
  The living image of my father shines."

  "Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
  Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin'd:)
  Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
  My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
  Hail, and be bless'd! For scarce of mortal kind
  Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind."

  "Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
  (The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
  But say, convey'st thou through the lonely plains
  What yet most precious of thy store remains,
  To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
  Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
  Or fliest thou now?--What hopes can Troy retain,
  Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?"

  The king, alarm'd: "Say what, and whence thou art
  Who search the sorrows of a parent's heart,
  And know so well how godlike Hector died?"
  Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

  "You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
  On this sad subject you inquire too much.
  Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view'd
  In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
  I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss'd
  On thousand ships, and wither'd half a host:
  I saw, but help'd not: stern Achilles' ire
  Forbade assistance, and enjoy'd the fire.
  For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
  One ship convey'd us from our native place;
  Polyctor is my sire, an honour'd name,
  Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
  Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
  To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
  To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
  For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
  Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
  And scarce their rulers check their martial rage."

  "If then thou art of stern Pelides' train,
  (The mournful monarch thus rejoin'd again,)
  Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
  My son's dear relics? what befals him dead?
  Have dogs dismember'd (on the naked plains),
  Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

  "O favour'd of the skies! (thus answered then
  The power that mediates between god and men)
  Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
  But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
  This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
  Untouch'd by worms, untainted by the air.
  Still as Aurora's ruddy beam is spread,
  Round his friend's tomb Achilles drags the dead:
  Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
  All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
  Majestical in death! No stains are found
  O'er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
  Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
  Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
  A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

  Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
  And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
  "Blest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant tribute of respect and love!
  Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
  My son forgot not, in exalted power;
  And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
  But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
  A pledge of gratitude for Hector's sake;
  And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
  Safe to Pelides' tent conduct my way."

  To whom the latent god: "O king, forbear
  To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
  But can I, absent from my prince's sight,
  Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
  What from our master's interest thus we draw,
  Is but a licensed theft that 'scapes the law.
  Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
  And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
  Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
  On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
  O'er pathless forests, or the roaring main."

  He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
  And snatch'd the reins, and whirl'd the lash around:
  Before the inspiring god that urged them on,
  The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
  And now they reach'd the naval walls, and found
  The guards repasting, while the bowls go round;
  On these the virtue of his wand he tries,
  And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:
  Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,
  And o'er the trenches led the rolling cars.
  Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,
  And now approach'd Pelides' lofty tent.
  On firs the roof was raised, and cover'd o'er
  With reeds collected from the marshy shore;
  And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,
  (The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat.
  Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength
  A solid pine-tree barr'd of wondrous length:
  Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight,
  But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
  This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide;
  Then swift alighted the celestial guide,
  And thus reveal'd--"Hear, prince! and understand
  Thou ow'st thy guidance to no mortal hand:
  Hermes I am, descended from above,
  The king of arts, the messenger of Jove,
  Farewell: to shun Achilles' sight I fly;
  Uncommon are such favours of the sky,
  Nor stand confess'd to frail mortality.
  Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers;
  Adjure him by his father's silver hairs,
  His son, his mother! urge him to bestow
  Whatever pity that stern heart can know."

  Thus having said, he vanish'd from his eyes,
  And in a moment shot into the skies:
  The king, confirm'd from heaven, alighted there,
  And left his aged herald on the car,
  With solemn pace through various rooms he went,
  And found Achilles in his inner tent:
  There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave,
  And great Automedon, attendance gave:
  These served his person at the royal feast;
  Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.

  Unseen by these, the king his entry made:
  And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,
  Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears;
  Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears;
  Those direful hands his kisses press'd, embrued
  Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!

  As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,
  Pursued for murder, flies his native clime)
  Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed,
  All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:
  Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise:
  All mute, yet seem'd to question with their eyes:
  Each look'd on other, none the silence broke,
  Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke:

  "Ah think, thou favour'd of the powers divine!(295)
  Think of thy father's age, and pity mine!
  In me that father's reverend image trace,
  Those silver hairs, that venerable face;
  His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
  In all my equal, but in misery!
  Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
  Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
  Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
  And beg protection with a feeble cry.
  Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
  He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
  And, hearing, still may hope a better day
  May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
  No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
  The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
  Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
  The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
  Nineteen one mother bore--Dead, all are dead!
  How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
  Still one was left their loss to recompense;
  His father's hope, his country's last defence.
  Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
  Unhappy in his country's cause he fell!

  "For him through hostile camps I bent my way,
  For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
  Large gifts proportion'd to thy wrath I bear;
  O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

  "Think of thy father, and this face behold!
  See him in me, as helpless and as old!
  Though not so wretched: there he yields to me,
  The first of men in sovereign misery!
  Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace
  The scourge and ruin of my realm and race;
  Suppliant my children's murderer to implore,
  And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!"

  These words soft pity in the chief inspire,
  Touch'd with the dear remembrance of his sire.
  Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)
  The old man's cheek he gently turn'd away.
  Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;
  And now the mingled tides together flow:
  This low on earth, that gently bending o'er;
  A father one, and one a son deplore:
  But great Achilles different passions rend,
  And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
  The infectious softness through the heroes ran;
  One universal solemn shower began;
  They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.

  Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
  From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
  The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
  On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
  Not unrelenting; then serene began
  With words to soothe the miserable man:

  "Alas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,
  Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone
  Two pass through foes, and thus undaunted face
  The man whose fury has destroy'd thy race!
  Heaven sure has arm'd thee with a heart of steel,
  A strength proportion'd to the woes you feel.
  Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:
  To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
  Such is, alas! the gods' severe decree:
  They, only they are blest, and only free.
  Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
  The source of evil one, and one of good;
  From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
  Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
  To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
  To taste the bad unmix'd, is cursed indeed;
  Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
  He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
  The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
  But find the cordial draught is dash'd with care.
  Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
  What stars concurring bless'd his natal hour!
  A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
  Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
  One evil yet o'ertakes his latest day:
  No race succeeding to imperial sway;
  An only son; and he, alas! ordain'd
  To fall untimely in a foreign land.
  See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
  Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
  Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
  In riches once, in children once excell'd;
  Extended Phrygia own'd thy ample reign,
  And all fair Lesbos' blissful seats contain,
  And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured main.
  But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
  And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
  What sees the sun, but hapless heroes' falls?
  War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
  What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
  These unavailing sorrows o'er the dead;
  Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
  But thou, alas! may'st live to suffer more!"

  To whom the king: "O favour'd of the skies!
  Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
  On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
  O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
  His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
  Thou, as thou may'st, these boundless stores enjoy;
  Safe may'st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
  So shall thy pity and forbearance give
  A weak old man to see the light and live!"

  "Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
  While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
  Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
  To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
  For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
  (Old Ocean's daughter, silver-footed dame,)
  Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
  Some god impels with courage not thy own:
  No human hand the weighty gates unbarr'd,
  Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
  To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
  Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove's command,
  I show thee, king! thou tread'st on hostile land;
  Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o'er,
  And shake the purpose of my soul no more."

  The sire obey'd him, trembling and o'eraw'd.
  Achilles, like a lion, rush'd abroad:
  Automedon and Alcimus attend,
  (Whom most he honour'd, since he lost his friend,)
  These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
  And led the hoary herald to the tent;
  Next, heap'd on high, the numerous presents bear,
  (Great Hector's ransom,) from the polish'd car.
  Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,
  They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
  Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil
  To wash the body and anoint with oil,
  Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire,
  Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
  The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
  Nor Jove's command, should check the rising rage.
  This done, the garments o'er the corse they spread;
  Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:
  Then, while the body on the car they laid,
  He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus' shade:

  "If, in that gloom which never light must know,
  The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below,
  O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil
  (Restoring Hector) heaven's unquestion'd will.
  The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,
  To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine."(296)

  He said, and, entering, took his seat of state;
  Where full before him reverend Priam sate;
  To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun:
  "Lo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;
  Extended on the funeral couch he lies;
  And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,
  The sight is granted to thy longing eyes:
  But now the peaceful hours of sacred night
  Demand reflection, and to rest invite:
  Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,
  The common cares that nourish life forego.
  Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,
  A parent once, whose sorrows equall'd thine:
  Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids,
  In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;
  Those by Apollo's silver bow were slain,
  These, Cynthia's arrows stretch'd upon the plain:
  So was her pride chastised by wrath divine,
  Who match'd her own with bright Latona's line;
  But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoy'd;
  Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroy'd.
  Steep'd in their blood, and in the dust outspread,
  Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead;
  None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
  (For Jove had turn'd the nation all to stone.)
  The gods themselves, at length relenting gave
  The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
  Herself a rock (for such was heaven's high will)
  Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;
  Where round the bed whence Achelous springs,
  The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;
  There high on Sipylus's shaggy brow,
  She stands, her own sad monument of woe;
  The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.

  "Such griefs, O king! have other parents known;
  Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
  The care of heaven thy Hector has appear'd,
  Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr'd;
  Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown'd,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream around."

  He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe
  With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
  The limbs they sever from the reeking hide,
  With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:
  Each on the coals the separate morsels lays,
  And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Automedon bestow'd.
  The chief himself to each his portion placed,
  And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
  When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
  The wondering hero eyes his royal guest:
  No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
  His godlike aspect and majestic size;
  Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;
  And there, the mild benevolence of age.
  Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
  (A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:

  "Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
  My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
  For, since the day that number'd with the dead
  My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
  Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
  My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
  Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
  I share thy banquet, and consent to live."

  With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
  With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
  Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
  And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
  Then he: "Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
  Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
  Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
  To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
  Approaching sudden to our open'd tent,
  Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
  Should such report thy honour'd person here,
  The king of men the ransom might defer;
  But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
  Remains unask'd; what time the rites require
  To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
  Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey."

  "If then thy will permit (the monarch said)
  To finish all due honours to the dead,
  This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
  The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
  And at what distance from our walls aspire
  The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
  Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
  The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
  The next, to raise his monument be given;
  The twelfth we war, if war be doom'd by heaven!"

  "This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
  Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy."

  Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
  The old man's fears, and turn'd within the tent;
  Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms,
  Expects her hero with desiring arms.
  But in the porch the king and herald rest;
  Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
  Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
  Industrious Hermes only was awake,
  The king's return revolving in his mind,
  To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
  The power descending hover'd o'er his head:
  "And sleep'st thou, father! (thus the vision said:)
  Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
  Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord?
  Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,
  Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee;
  May offer all thy treasures yet contain,
  To spare thy age; and offer all in vain."

  Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,
  And raised his friend: the god before him goes:
  He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,
  And moves in silence through the hostile land.
  When now to Xanthus' yellow stream they drove,
  (Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)
  The winged deity forsook their view,
  And in a moment to Olympus flew.
  Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray,
  Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:
  Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go
  The sage and king, majestically slow.
  Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion's spire,
  The sad procession of her hoary sire;
  Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
  (Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
  A shower of tears o'erflows her beauteous eyes,
  Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

  "Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
  Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
  If e'er ye rush'd in crowds, with vast delight,
  To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
  Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
  Your common triumph, and your common woe."

  In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
  Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
  In every face the self-same grief is shown;
  And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
  At Scaea's gates they meet the mourning wain,
  Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
  The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
  Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter'd hair:
  Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
  And there had sigh'd and sorrow'd out the day;
  But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
  "Forbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
  First to the palace let the car proceed,
  Then pour your boundless sorrows o'er the dead."

  The waves of people at his word divide,
  Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
  Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
  They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
  A melancholy choir attend around,
  With plaintive sighs, and music's solemn sound:
  Alternately they sing, alternate flow
  The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
  While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
  And nature speaks at every pause of art.

  First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
  Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
  "And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
  Snatch'd in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only son, once comfort of our pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  Never to manly age that son shall rise,
  Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
  For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
  Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
  Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
  Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
  Now hostile fleets must waft those infants o'er
  (Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
  Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
  The sad companion of thy mother's woe;
  Driven hence a slave before the victor's sword
  Condemn'd to toil for some inhuman lord:
  Or else some Greek whose father press'd the plain,
  Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
  In Hector's blood his vengeance shall enjoy,
  And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.(297)
  For thy stern father never spared a foe:
  Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe!
  Thence many evils his sad parents bore,
  His parents many, but his consort more.
  Why gav'st thou not to me thy dying hand?
  And why received not I thy last command?
  Some word thou would'st have spoke, which, sadly dear,
  My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
  Which never, never could be lost in air,
  Fix'd in my heart, and oft repeated there!"

  Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
  Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

  The mournful mother next sustains her part:
  "O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
  Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
  And by the immortals even in death beloved!
  While all my other sons in barbarous bands
  Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
  This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
  Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
  Sentenced, 'tis true, by his inhuman doom,
  Thy noble corse was dragg'd around the tomb;
  (The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
  Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
  Yet glow'st thou fresh with every living grace;
  No mark of pain, or violence of face:
  Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver bow
  Dismiss'd thee gently to the shades below."

  Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
  Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
  Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
  Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

  "Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join'd(298)
  Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind,
  Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o'er
  Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
  (O had I perish'd, ere that form divine
  Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
  Yet was it ne'er my fate, from thee to find
  A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
  When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
  Thy pity check'd my sorrows in their flow.
  If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
  Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
  Thy gentle accents soften'd all my pain.
  For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
  The wretched source of all this misery.
  The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
  Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
  Through Troy's wide streets abandon'd shall I roam!
  In Troy deserted, as abhorr'd at home!"

  So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
  Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
  On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
  But Priam check'd the torrent as it rose:
  "Perform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
  And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
  Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
  Achilles grants these honours to the dead."(299)

                    [Illustration: FUNERAL OF HECTOR.]

                            FUNERAL OF HECTOR.


  He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train
  Their mules and oxen harness to the wain,
  Pour through the gates, and fell'd from Ida's crown,
  Roll back the gather'd forests to the town.
  These toils continue nine succeeding days,
  And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
  But when the tenth fair morn began to shine,
  Forth to the pile was borne the man divine,
  And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes,
  Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise.
  Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
  With rosy lustre streak'd the dewy lawn,
  Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre,
  And quench with wine the yet remaining fire.
  The snowy bones his friends and brothers place
  (With tears collected) in a golden vase;
  The golden vase in purple palls they roll'd,
  Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.
  Last o'er the urn the sacred earth they spread,
  And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead.
  (Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done,
  Watch'd from the rising to the setting sun.)
  All Troy then moves to Priam's court again,
  A solemn, silent, melancholy train:
  Assembled there, from pious toil they rest,
  And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast.
  Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,
  And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade.(300)





CONCLUDING NOTE.


We have now passed through the Iliad, and seen the anger of Achilles, and
the terrible effects of it, at an end, as that only was the subject of the
poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author to proceed
to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the common reader
to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the chief actors in
this poem after the conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector by
the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are described
by Virgil in the second book of the Cneid.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an arrow
in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself through
indignation.

Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at the
taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her
first husband, who received her again into favour.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Cgysthus, at the
instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had dishonoured
his bed with Cgysthus.

Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and scarce
escaped with his life from his adulterous wife Cgiale; but at last was
received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is uncertain how
he died.

Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country.

Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last returned
in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homer's Odyssey.

For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking leave
at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others, with any
defences or apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring to raise a
vain monument to myself, of the merits or difficulties of it (which must
be left to the world, to truth, and to posterity), let me leave behind me
a memorial of my friendship with one of the most valuable of men, as well
as finest writers, of my age and country, one who has tried, and knows by
his own experience, how hard an undertaking it is to do justice to Homer,
and one whom (I am sure) sincerely rejoices with me at the period of my
labours. To him, therefore, having brought this long work to a conclusion,
I desire to dedicate it, and to have the honour and satisfaction of
placing together, in this manner, the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of

March 25, 1720

                                                                   A. POPE

Ton theon de eupoiia--to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetikn kai allois
epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos
proionta.

                           M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso,_ lib. i. Section 17.





END OF THE ILLIAD






FOOTNOTES


    1 "What," says Archdeacon Wilberforce, "is the natural root of loyalty
      as distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal security
      as is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that
      consciousness of a natural bond among the families of men which
      gives a fellow-feeling to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists
      their affections in behalf of those time-honoured representatives of
      their ancient blood, in whose success they feel a personal interest?
      Hence the delight when we recognize an act of nobility or justice in
      our hereditary princes

        "'Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo,
        Projice tela manu _sanguis meus_'

      "So strong is this feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence
      even when history witnesses that vast convulsions have rent and
      weakened it and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts has been
      rekindled in our own days towards the grand daughter of George the
      Third of Hanover.

      "Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those
      great lawgivers of man's race, who have given expression, in the
      immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature.
      The thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance
      of the human race. In this mutual ground every man meets his
      brother, they have been bet forth by the providence of God to
      vindicate for all of us what nature could effect, and that, in these
      representatives of our race, we might recognize our common
      benefactors.'--_Doctrine of the Incarnation,_ pp. 9, 10.

    2 Eikos de min aen kai mnaemoruna panton grapherthai. Vit. Hom. in
      Schweigh Herodot t. iv. p. 299, sq. Section 6. I may observe that
      this Life has been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend
      Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the
      Odyssey. The present abridgement however, will contain all that is
      of use to the reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is
      most insignificant.

    3 --_I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair observes,
      "The first poets sang their own verses." Sextus Empir. adv. Mus. p.
      360 ed. Fabric. Ou hamelei ge toi kai oi poiaetai melopoioi
      legontai, kai ta Omaerou epae to palai pros lyran aedeto.

      "The voice," observes Heeren, "was always accompanied by some
      instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a
      prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he
      accompanied the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a
      medium between singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody
      were regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to
      remain intelligible to all. In countries where nothing similar is
      found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but
      whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of
      Italy, can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius."--_Ancient
      Greece,_ p. 94.

    4 "Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing
      that "poplars can hardly live so long".  But setting aside the fact
      that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients
      had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near
      places consecrated by the presence of gods and great men. See Cicero
      de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under
      which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona
      gave birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of
      Byzantium, _s. v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any
      of the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd
      rightly observes, "The authenticity of these fragments depends upon
      that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are
      taken." Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop. Cf. Coleridge,
      Classic Poets, p. 317.

    5 It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert. Vit.
      Cleob. p. 62, ed. Casaub.

    6 I trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the
      Greek leschai.

    7 Os ei tous, Homerous doxei trephein autois, omilon pollon te kai
      achreoin exousin. enteuthen de kai tounoma Homeros epekrataese to
      Melaesigenei apo taes symphoraes oi gar Kumaioi tous tuphlous
      Homerous legousin. Vit. Hom. _l. c._ p. 311. The etymology has been
      condemned by recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127,
      and Mackenzie's note, p. xiv.

    8 Thestorides, thnetoisin anoiston poleon per, ouden aphrastoteron
      peletai noou anthropoisin. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at Phocoea,
      Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the Phocoeid.
      See Muller's Hist. of Lit., vi. Section 3. Welcker, _l. c._ pp. 132,
      272, 358, sqq., and Mure, Gr. Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq.

    9 This is so pretty a picture of early manners and hospitality, that
      it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from the
      Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was the author of
      this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer
      with certain events described in his poems, and in eliciting from
      them the germs of something like a personal narrative.

   10 Dia logon estionto. A common metaphor. So Plato calls the parties
      conversing daitumones, or estiatores. Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist.
      Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. Petav So diaegaemasi sophois
      omou kai terpnois aedio taen Thoinaen tois hestiomenois epoiei,
      Choricius in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. T. viii. P. 851. logois gar estia,
      Athenaeus vii p 275, A

   11 It was at Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that
      Homer is said to have written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of
      the Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia, and some other minor works.

   12 Chandler, Travels,  vol. i. p. 61, referred to in the Voyage
      Pittoresque dans la Grece, vol. i. P. 92, where a view of the spot
      is given of which the author candidly says,-- "Je ne puis repondre
      d'une exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue generale que j'en donne,
      car etant alle seul pour l'examiner je perdis mon crayon, et je fus
      oblige de m'en fier a ma memoire. Je ne crois cependant pas avoir
      trop a me plaindre d'elle en cette occasion."

   13 A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the character
      of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the assumption
      of Mentor's form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses, Minerva.
      The classical reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p. 880;
      _Xyland._ Heraclid. Pont. Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Gale's Opusc.
      Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s.
      f.

   14 Vit. Hom. Section 28.

   15 The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenzie's note, p. xxx.

   16 Heeren's Ancient Greece, p. 96.

   17 Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer's Caxtons v. i. p. 4.

   18 Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387.

   19 Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

   20 Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which
      I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

          "Origias, farewell! and oh! remember me
          Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
          A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
          And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
          Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
          Oh! answer all,--'A blind old man and poor
        Sweetest he sings--and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'"

                                                   _See_ Thucyd. iii, 104.

   21 Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26. Othen en tae Odysseia
      pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio, oo dixa taes
      sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos

   22 See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie
      has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers
      on the subject, which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and
      Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. His own views are moderate,
      and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses
      hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend
      those hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in
      advocating any individual theory.

   23 Letters to Phileleuth; Lips.

   24 Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq.

   25 It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the memory
      may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to that
      of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
      warning, to 'rhapsodize,' night after night, parts which when laid
      together, would amount to an immense number of lines. But all this
      is nothing to two instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a
      gentleman of the highest intellectual attainments, and who held a
      distinguished rank among the men of letters in the last century, he
      informed us that the day before he had passed much time in examining
      a man, not highly educated, who had learned to repeat the whole
      Gierusalemme of Tasso, not only to recite it consecutively, but also
      to repeat those stanzas in utter defiance of the sense, either
      forwards or backwards, or from the eighth line to the first,
      alternately the odd and even lines--in short, whatever the passage
      required; the memory, which seemed to cling to the words much more
      than to the sense, had it at such perfect command, that it could
      produce it under any form. Our informant went on to state that this
      singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the
      same manner. But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to
      which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty
      years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No such person
      can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could
      actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse
      required from any part of the Bible--even the obscurest and most
      unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not
      mention these facts as touching the more difficult part of the
      question before us, but facts they are; and if we find so much
      difficulty in calculating the extent to which the mere memory may be
      cultivated, are we, in these days of multifarious reading, and of
      countless distracting affairs, fair judges of the perfection to
      which the invention and the memory combined may attain in a simpler
      age, and among a more single minded people?--Quarterly Review, _l.
      c.,_ p. 143, sqq.

      Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, "The
      Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer
      in length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it
      exists only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with
      writing. But the songs of a nation are probably the last things
      which are committed to writing, for the very reason that they are
      remembered."-- _Ancient Greece._ p. 100.

   26 Vol. II p. 198, sqq.

   27 Quarterly Review, _l. c.,_ p. 131 sq.

   28 Betrachtungen uber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p. 204. Notes
      and Queries, vol. v. p. 221.

   29 Prolegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c.

   30 Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq.

   31 "Who," says Cicero, de Orat. iii. 34, "was more learned in that age,
      or whose eloquence is reported to have been more perfected by
      literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first to have
      disposed the books of Homer in the order in which we now have them?"
      Compare Wolf's Prolegomena, Section 33

   32 "The first book, together with the eighth, and the books from the
      eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seems to form the primary
      organization of the poem, then properly an Achilleis."--Grote, vol.
      ii. p. 235

   33 K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq.

   34 See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroeder's edition, 4to.,
      Delphis, 1728.

   35 Ancient Greece, p. 101.

   36 The best description of this monument will be found in Vaux's
      "Antiquities of the British Museum," p. 198 sq. The monument itself
      (Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known.

   37 Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276.

   38 Preface to her Homer.

   39 Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c.

   40 The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few particulars,
      is translated from Bitaube, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary
      that has ever been drawn up:--"A hero, injured by his general, and
      animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a
      season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this
      interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been
      occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of
      which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length
      opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the
      principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission
      to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent
      presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his
      character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated,
      and is on the verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a
      friend; this friend weeps before him, and asks for the hero's arms,
      and for permission to go to the war in his stead. The eloquence of
      friendship prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or
      the gifts of the general. He lends his armour to his friend, but
      commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy's army,
      because he reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and
      because he also fears for his friend's life. The prohibition is
      forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but his courage; his corpse
      is brought back to the hero, and the hero's arms become the prize of
      the conqueror. Then the hero, given up to the most lively despair,
      prepares to fight; he receives from a divinity new armour, is
      reconciled with his general and, thirsting for glory and revenge,
      enacts prodigies of valour, recovers the victory, slays the enemy's
      chief, honours his friend with superb funeral rites, and exercises a
      cruel vengeance on the body of his destroyer; but finally appeased
      by the tears and prayers of the father of the slain warrior,
      restores to the old man the corpse of his son, which he buries with
      due solemnities.'--Coleridge, p. 177, sqq.

   41 Vultures: Pope is more accurate than the poet he translates, for
      Homer writes "a prey to dogs and to _all_ kinds of birds. But all
      kinds of birds are not carnivorous.

   42 --_i.e._ during the whole time of their striving the will of Jove was
      being gradually accomplished.

   43 Compare Milton's "Paradise Lost" i. 6

        "Sing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
        Of Horeb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
        That shepherd."

   44 --_Latona's son: i.e._ Apollo.

   45 --_King of men:_ Agamemnon.

   46 --_Brother kings:_ Menelaus and Agamemnon.

   47 --_Smintheus_ an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian name for a
      _mouse,_ was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a plague of
      mice which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however, says, that
      when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by an
      oracle to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by
      the original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for
      the night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern
      straps of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment
      of the oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to
      Sminthean Apollo. Grote, "History of Greece," i. p. 68, remarks that
      the "worship of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and
      its neighboring territory, dates before the earliest period of
      Aeolian colonization."

   48 --_Cilla,_ a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a
      sister of Hippodamia, slain by OEnomaus.

   49 A mistake. It should be,


          "If e'er I _roofed_ thy graceful fane,"


      for the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later
      date.

   50 --_Bent was his bow_ "The Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in mind,
      is a different character from the deity of the same name in the
      later classical pantheon. Throughout both poems, all deaths from
      unforeseen or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate
      of the young child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of
      infancy or flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into
      the grave, or of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career
      of crime, are ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The
      oracular functions of the god rose naturally out of the above
      fundamental attributes, for who could more appropriately impart to
      mortals what little foreknowledge Fate permitted of her decrees than
      the agent of her most awful dispensations? The close union of the
      arts of prophecy and song explains his additional office of god of
      music, while the arrows with which he and his sister were armed,
      symbols of sudden death in every age, no less naturally procured him
      that of god of archery. Of any connection between Apollo and the
      Sun, whatever may have existed in the more esoteric doctrine of the
      Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in either Iliad or
      Odyssey."--Mure, "History of Greek Literature," vol. i. p. 478, sq.

   51 It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with
      animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind.

   52 --_Convened to council._ The public assembly in the heroic times is
      well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. "It is an assembly for
      talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the chiefs
      in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizers--often for
      eloquence, and sometimes for quarrel--but here its ostensible
      purposes end."

   53 Old Jacob Duport, whose "Gnomologia Homerica" is full of curious and
      useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which
      reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the
      belief that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men
      were interested.

   54 Rather, "bright-eyed." See the German critics quoted by Arnold.

   55 The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received
      Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus.

   56 The Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took
      their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is
      fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an
      _ant,_ "because they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like
      them were indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the
      earth; the change from ants to men is founded merely on the
      equivocation of their name, which resembles that of the ant: they
      bore a further resemblance to these little animals, in that instead
      of inhabiting towns or villages, at first they commonly resided in
      the open fields, having no other retreats but dens and the cavities
      of trees, until Ithacus brought them together, and settled them in
      more secure and comfortable habitations."--Anthon's "Lempriere."

   57 Eustathius, after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes this
      apparition, as if the appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen by
      the rest, was intended to point out the sudden recollection that he
      would gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and that it were best to
      restrain his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his services.
      The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, "De Deo
      Socratis."

   58 Compare Milton, "Paradise Lost," bk. ii:

          "Though his tongue
        Dropp'd manna."

      So Proverbs v. 3, "For the lips of a strange woman drop as an
      honey-comb."

   59 Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being supposed
      to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could not be
      obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for the
      lustration. Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati perriranai,
      embalon alas, phakois.

   60 The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at
      liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation.
      Pollux, Onom. viii. p. 159. The office was generally given to old
      men, and they were believed to be under the especial protection of
      Jove and Mercury.

   61 His mother, Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was
      courted by Neptune and Jupiter. When, however, it was known that the
      son to whom she would give birth must prove greater than his father,
      it was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus, with great
      difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by
      assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire
      through her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles
      would have shared the same fate had not his father rescued him. She
      afterwards rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters
      of the Styx, with the exception of that part of the heel by which
      she held him. Hygin. Fab. 54

   62 Thebe was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium.

   63 That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes.

   64 Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service
      rendered to Jove by Thetis:

        "Nay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove
        She loosed"--Dyce's "Calaber," s. 58.

   65 --_To Fates averse._ Of the gloomy destiny reigning throughout the
      Homeric poems, and from which even the gods are not exempt, Schlegel
      well observes, "This power extends also to the world of gods-- for
      the Grecian gods are mere powers of nature--and although immeasurably
      higher than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on
      an equal footing with himself."--'Lectures on the Drama' v. p. 67.

   66 It has been observed that the annual procession of the sacred ship
      so often represented on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the
      deity from Ethiopia after some days' absence, serves to show the
      Ethiopian origin of Thebes, and of the worship of Jupiter Ammon. "I
      think," says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the
      holy ship, "that this procession is represented in one of the great
      sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon
      is on the shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by
      another boat. It is therefore on its voyage. This must have been one
      of the most celebrated festivals, since, even according to the
      interpretation of antiquity, Homer alludes to it when he speaks of
      Jupiter's visit to the Ethiopians, and his twelve days'
      absence."--Long, "Egyptian Antiquities" vol. 1 p. 96. Eustathius,
      vol. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. Basil) gives this interpretation, and
      likewise an allegorical one, which we will spare the reader.

   67 --_Atoned,_ i.e. reconciled. This is the proper and most natural
      meaning of the word, as may be seen from Taylor's remarks in
      Calmet's Dictionary, p.110, of my edition.

   68 That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats. "If
      the sacrifice was in honour of the celestial gods, the throat was
      bent upwards towards heaven; but if made to the heroes, or infernal
      deities, it was killed with its throat toward the ground."-- "Elgin
      Marbles," vol i. p.81.

        "The jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
        The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste,
        Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;
        The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
        Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
        Stretch'd on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
        Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with
                    wine."

                                                Dryden's "Virgil," i. 293.

   69 --_Crown'd, i.e._ filled to the brim. The custom of adorning goblets
      with flowers was of later date.

   70 --_He spoke,_ &c. "When a friend inquired of Phidias what pattern he
      had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he is said to have answered by
      repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the poet represents
      the majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby signifying
      that the genius of Homer had inspired him with it. Those who beheld
      this statue are said to have been so struck with it as to have asked
      whether Jupiter had descended from heaven to show himself to
      Phidias, or whether Phidias had been carried thither to contemplate
      the god."-- "Elgin Marbles," vol. xii p.124.

           71 "So was his will
          Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath,
          That shook heav'n's whole circumference, confirm'd."

                                                  "Paradise Lost" ii. 351.

   72 --_A double bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something
      like the measures by which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is
      sold. See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq.

   73 "Paradise Lost," i. 44.

          "Him th' Almighty power
        Hurl'd headlong flaming from th ethereal sky,
        With hideous ruin and combustion"

   74 The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Jove's displeasure was
      this--After Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a
      storm, which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast
      Jove into a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in revenge,
      fastened iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and
      Vulcan, attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in
      the manner described. The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep
      explanations for this amusing fiction. See Heraclides, 'Ponticus,"
      p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The story is told by Homer himself in Book xv.
      The Sinthians were a race of robbers, the ancient inhabitants of
      Lemnos which island was ever after sacred to Vulcan.

        "Nor was his name unheard or unadored
        In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
        Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
        From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
        Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn
        To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
        A summer's day and with the setting sun
        Dropp'd from the zenith like a falling star
        On Lemnos, th' Aegean isle thus they relate."

                                                   "Paradise Lost," i. 738

   75 It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that "The gods
      formed a sort of political community of their own which had its
      hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for
      power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora
      of Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets or festivals."

   76 Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this deception of
      Jupiter's, and at his other attacks on the character of the gods,
      that he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment. (See
      Minucius Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well
      observes, that the supreme father of gods and men had a full right
      to employ a lying spirit to work out his ultimate will. Compare
      "Paradise Lost," v. 646:

          "And roseate dews disposed
        All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest."

   77 --_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think,
      evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and others.

        "When, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream
        Rush'd from the skies, the bane of her and Troy."

                  Dyce's "Select Translations from Quintus Calaber," p.10.

           78 "Sleep'st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close
        Thy eye-lids?"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 673.

   79 This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving voice
      of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See Pliny's Panegyric
      on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,


          "Turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem."


   80 --_The same in habit, &c._

        "To whom once more the winged god appears;
        His former youthful mien and shape he wears."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 803.

           81 "As bees in spring-time, when
        The sun with Taurus rides,
        Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
        In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
        Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
        The suburb of this straw-built citadel,
        New-nibb'd with balm, expatiate and confer
        Their state affairs. So thick the very crowd
        Swarm'd and were straiten'd."--"Paradise Lost" i. 768.

   82 It was the herald's duty to make the people sit down. "A _standing_
      agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an evening
      agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the forerunner of
      mischief ('Odyssey,' iii. 138)."--Grote, ii. p. 91, _note._

   83 This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of
      the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See
      Thucydides i. 9. "It is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being
      the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in
      furthering the process of acquisition."--Grote, i. p. 212. Compare
      Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Selections, p. 43).

          "Thus the monarch spoke,
        Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup,
        Golden, and framed by art divine (a gift
        Which to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan brought
        Upon his nuptial day, when he espoused
        The Queen of Love), the sire of gods bestow'd
        The cup on Dardanus, who gave it next
        To Ericthonius Tros received it then,
        And left it, with his wealth, to be possess'd
        By Ilus he to great Laomedon
        Gave it, and last to Priam's lot it fell."

   84 Grote, i, p. 393, states the number of the Grecian forces at upwards
      of 100,000 men. Nichols makes a total of 135,000.

           85 "As thick as when a field
        Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
        His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
        Sways them."--Paradise Lost," iv. 980, sqq.

   86 This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest
      tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of
      power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it,
      and, in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in
      the Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren,
      "Ancient Greece," ch. vi. p. 105.

   87 It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and
      contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition
      of Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent.
      Of the gradual and individual development of Homer's heroes,
      Schlegel well observes, "In bas-relief the figures are usually in
      profile, and in the epos all are characterized in the simplest
      manner in relief; they are not grouped together, but follow one
      another; so Homer's heroes advance, one by one, in succession before
      us. It has been remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively
      closed, but that we are left to suppose something both to precede
      and to follow it. The bas-relief is equally without limit, and may
      be continued _ad infinitum,_ either from before or behind, on which
      account the ancients preferred for it such subjects as admitted of
      an indefinite extension, sacrificial processions, dances, and lines
      of combatants, and hence they also exhibit bas-reliefs on curved
      surfaces, such as vases, or the frieze of a rotunda, where, by the
      curvature, the two ends are withdrawn from our sight, and where,
      while we advance, one object appears as another disappears. Reading
      Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present object alone
      arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, and do not
      concern ourselves about what is to follow."--"Dramatic Literature,"
      p. 75.

   88 "There cannot be a clearer indication than this description --so
      graphic in the original poem--of the true character of the Homeric
      agora. The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent,
      not often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief. The fate
      which awaits a presumptuous critic, even where his virulent
      reproaches are substantially well-founded, is plainly set forth in
      the treatment of Thersites; while the unpopularity of such a
      character is attested even more by the excessive pains which Homer
      takes to heap upon him repulsive personal deformities, than by the
      chastisement of Odysseus he is lame, bald, crook-backed, of
      misshapen head, and squinting vision."--Grote, vol. i. p. 97.

   89 According to Pausanias, both the sprig and the remains of the tree
      were exhibited in his time. The tragedians, Lucretius and others,
      adopted a different fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and
      seem to have found the sacrifice of Iphigena better suited to form
      the subject of a tragedy. Compare Dryden's "Cneid," vol. iii. sqq.

   90 --_Full of his god, i.e.,_ Apollo, filled with the prophetic spirit.
      "_The_ god" would be more simple and emphatic.

   91 Those critics who have maintained that the "Catalogue of Ships" is
      an interpolation, should have paid more attention to these lines,
      which form a most natural introduction to their enumeration.

   92 The following observation will be useful to Homeric readers:
      "Particular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to particular
      deities. To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of
      advanced age might be offered. An ox of five years old was
      considered especially acceptable to Jupiter. A black bull, a ram, or
      a boar pig, were offerings for Neptune. A heifer, or a sheep, for
      Minerva. To Ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn. The
      goat to Bacchus, because he fed on vines. Diana was propitiated with
      a stag; and to Venus the dove was consecrated. The infernal and evil
      deities were to be appeased with black victims. The most acceptable
      of all sacrifices was the heifer of a year old, which had never
      borne the yoke. It was to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and
      without blemish."--"Elgin Marbles," vol. i. p. 78.

   93 --_Idomeneus,_ son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having vowed,
      during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune
      the first creature that should present itself to his eye on the
      Cretan shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow.

   94 --_Tydeus' son, i.e._ Diomed.

   95 That is, Ajax, the son of Oileus, a Locrian. He must be
      distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis.

   96 A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word
      _unbid,_ in this line. Even Plato, "Sympos." p. 315, has found some
      curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was
      there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one
      brother-king visiting another without a formal invitation?

   97 Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers
      about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by
      the river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, "Georgics," vol. i.
      383, sq.

   98 --_Scamander,_ or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising, according
      to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same hill with
      the Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at Sigaeum;
      everything tends to identify it with Mendere, as Wood, Rennell, and
      others maintain; the Mendere is 40 miles long, 300 feet broad, deep
      in the time of flood, nearly dry in the summer. Dr. Clarke
      successfully combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to
      have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source
      of the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now
      Kusdaghy; receives the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is
      very muddy, and flows through marshes. Between the Scamander and
      Simois, Homer's Troy is supposed to have stood: this river,
      according to Homer, was called Xanthus by the gods, Scamander by
      men. The waters of the Scamander had the singular property of giving
      a beautiful colour to the hair or wool of such animals as bathed in
      them; hence the three goddesses, Minerva, Juno, and Venus, bathed
      there before they appeared before Paris to obtain the golden apple:
      the name Xanthus, "yellow," was given to the Scamander, from the
      peculiar colour of its waters, still applicable to the Mendere, the
      yellow colour of whose waters attracts the attention of travellers.

   99 It should be "his _chest_ like Neptune." The torso of Neptune, in
      the "Elgin Marbles," No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for
      its breadth and massiveness of development.

          100 "Say first, for heav'n hides nothing from thy view."

                                                  --"Paradise Lost," i. 27.

        "Ma di' tu, Musa, come i primi danni
        Mandassero a Cristiani, e di quai parti:
        Tu 'l sai; ma di tant' opra a noi si lunge
        Debil aura di fama appena giunge."

                                                     --"Gier. Lib." iv. 19.

  101 "The Catalogue is, perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of
      which a claim to separate authorship has been most plausibly urged.
      Although the example of Homer has since rendered some such formal
      enumeration of the forces engaged, a common practice in epic poems
      descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute a
      statistical detail can neither be considered as imperatively
      required, nor perhaps such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest
      itself to the mind of a poet. Yet there is scarcely any portion of
      the Iliad where both historical and internal evidence are more
      clearly in favour of a connection from the remotest period, with the
      remainder of the work. The composition of the Catalogue, whensoever
      it may have taken place, necessarily presumes its author's
      acquaintance with a previously existing Iliad. It were impossible
      otherwise to account for the harmony observable in the recurrence of
      so vast a number of proper names, most of them historically
      unimportant, and not a few altogether fictitious: or of so many
      geographical and genealogical details as are condensed in these few
      hundred lines, and incidentally scattered over the thousands which
      follow: equally inexplicable were the pointed allusions occurring in
      this episode to events narrated in the previous and subsequent text,
      several of which could hardly be of traditional notoriety, but
      through the medium of the Iliad."--Mure, "Language and Literature of
      Greece," vol. i. p. 263.

  102 --_Twice Sixty:_ "Thucydides observes that the Boeotian vessels,
      which carried one hundred and twenty men each, were probably meant
      to be the largest in the fleet, and those of Philoctetes, carrying
      fifty each, the smallest. The average would be eighty-five, and
      Thucydides supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated
      themselves; and that very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere
      passengers or landsmen. In short, we have in the Homeric
      descriptions the complete picture of an Indian or African war canoe,
      many of which are considerably larger than the largest scale
      assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total number of the Greek
      ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to Thucydides, although
      in point of fact there are only eleven hundred and eighty-six in the
      Catalogue, the amount of the army, upon the foregoing average, will
      be about a hundred and two thousand men. The historian considers
      this a small force as representing all Greece. Bryant, comparing it
      with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large as to prove the
      entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and
      calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful
      perusal."--Coleridge, p. 211, sq.

  103 The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was called
      Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i. p.
      3, well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various
      towns and cities by the names by which they were known in his own
      time.

          104 "Adam, the goodliest man of men since born,
        His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.'

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 323.

  105 --_Csetes' tomb._ Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and of
      a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land marks.
      See my notes to my prose translations of the "Odyssey," ii. p. 21,
      or on Eur. "Alcest." vol. i. p. 240.

  106 --_Zeleia,_ another name for Lycia. The inhabitants were greatly
      devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller, "Dorians," vol. i. p.
      248.

  107 --_Barbarous tongues._ "Various as were the dialects of the
      Greeks--and these differences existed not only between the several
      tribes, but even between neighbouring cities--they yet acknowledged
      in their language that they formed but one nation were but branches
      of the same family. Homer has 'men of other tongues:' and yet Homer
      had no general name for the Greek nation."--Heeren, "Ancient Greece,"
      Section vii. p. 107, sq.

        _  108 The cranes._
        "Marking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes
        Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried:
        And each with outstretch'd neck his rank maintains,
        In marshall'd order through th' ethereal void."

                            Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe's Life, Appendix.

      See Cary's Dante: "Hell," canto v.

        _  109 Silent, breathing rage._
          "Thus they,
        Breathing united force with fixed thought,
        Moved on in silence."

                                             "Paradise Lost," book i. 559.

          110 "As when some peasant in a bushy brake
        Has with unwary footing press'd a snake;
        He starts aside, astonish'd, when he spies
        His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 510.

  111 Dysparis, i.e. unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the evils
      which resulted from his having been brought up, despite the omens
      which attended his birth.

  112 The following scene, in which Homer has contrived to introduce so
      brilliant a sketch of the Grecian warriors, has been imitated by
      Euripides, who in his "Phoenissae" represents Antigone surveying the
      opposing champions from a high tower, while the paedagogus describes
      their insignia and details their histories.

  113 --_No wonder,_ &c. Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have
      appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto. Valer Max.
      iii. 7.

  114 The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and sufferings
      of women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the Grecian
      heroes. A nation of courageous, hardy, indefatigable women, dwelling
      apart from men, permitting only a short temporary intercourse, for
      the purpose of renovating their numbers, burning out their right
      breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the bow freely;
      this was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of the
      poet, and a theme eminently popular with his hearers. We find these
      warlike females constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and
      universally accepted as past realities in the Iliad. When Priam
      wishes to illustrate emphatically the most numerous host in which he
      ever found himself included, he tells us that it was assembled in
      Phrygia, on the banks of the Sangarius, for the purpose of resisting
      the formidable Amazons. When Bellerophon is to be employed in a
      deadly and perilous undertaking, by those who prudently wished to
      procure his death, he is despatched against the Amazons.--Grote, vol.
      i p. 289.

  115 --_Antenor,_ like Cneas, had always been favourable to the
      restoration of Helen. Liv 1. 2.

          116 "His lab'ring heart with sudden rapture seized
        He paus'd, and on the ground in silence gazed.
        Unskill'd and uninspired he seems to stand,
        Nor lifts the eye, nor graceful moves the hand:
        Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung,
        Pours the full tide of eloquence along;
        While from his lips the melting torrent flows,
        Soft as the fleeces of descending snows.
        Now stronger notes engage the listening crowd,
        Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud,
        Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud."

                                        Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," 148, 99.

  117 Duport, "Gnomol. Homer," p. 20, well observes that this comparison
      may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of oratory.
      It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of Ulysses.

  118 --_Her brothers' doom._ They perished in combat with Lynceus and
      Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22. Virgil
      and others, however, make them share immortality by turns.

  119 Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain during
      this war. Cf. Cn, vi. 487.

  120 --_Scaea's gates,_ rather _Scaean gates,_ _i.e._ the left-hand gates.

  121 This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras descending
      to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not expire.

  122 --_Nor pierced._

        "This said, his feeble hand a jav'lin threw,
        Which, flutt'ring, seemed to loiter as it flew,
        Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
        And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 742.

_  123 Reveal'd the queen._

        "Thus having said, she turn'd and made appear
        Her neck refulgent and dishevell'd hair,
        Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach'd the ground,
        And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
        In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
        And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, i. 556.

  124 --_Cranae's isle, i.e._ Athens. See the "Schol." and Alberti's
      "Hesychius," vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its
      early kings, Cranaus.

  125 --_The martial maid._ In the original, "Minerva Alalcomeneis," _i.e.
      the defender,_ so called from her temple at Alalcomene in Boeotia.

  126 "Anything for a quiet life!"

  127 --_Argos._ The worship of Juno at Argos was very celebrated in
      ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of that
      city. Apul. Met., vi. p. 453; Servius on Virg. Cn., i. 28.

  128 --_A wife and sister._

        "But I, who walk in awful state above
        The majesty of heav'n, the sister-wife of Jove."

                                                 Dryden's "Virgil," i. 70.

      So Apuleius, _l. c._ speaks of her as "Jovis germana et conjux, and
      so Horace, Od. iii. 3, 64, "conjuge me Jovis et sorore."

          129 "Thither came Uriel, gleaming through the even
        On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star
        In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
        Impress the air, and shows the mariner
        From what point of his compass to beware
        Impetuous winds."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 555.

  130 --_Csepus' flood._ A river of Mysia, rising from Mount Cotyius, in
      the southern part of the chain of Ida.

  131 --_Zelia,_ a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida.

  132 --_Podaleirius_ and _Machaon_ are the leeches of the Grecian army,
      highly prized and consulted by all the wounded chiefs. Their medical
      renown was further prolonged in the subsequent poem of Arktinus, the
      Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as unrivalled in
      surgical operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and
      appreciating morbid symptoms. It was Podaleirius who first noticed
      the glaring eyes and disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide
      of Ajax.

      "Galen appears uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus) was
      originally a god, or whether he was first a man and then became
      afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date of
      his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical ages the descendants
      of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The many families or
      gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves to the study and
      practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt near the temples of
      Asklepius, whither sick and suffering men came to obtain relief--all
      recognized the god not merely as the object of their common worship,
      but also as their actual progenitor."--Grote vol. i. p. 248.

          133 "The plant she bruises with a stone, and stands
        Tempering the juice between her ivory hands
        This o'er her breast she sheds with sovereign art
        And bathes with gentle touch the wounded part
        The wound such virtue from the juice derives,
        At once the blood is stanch'd, the youth revives."

                                               "Orlando Furioso,"  book 1.

  134 --_Well might I wish._

        "Would heav'n (said he) my strength and youth recall,
        Such as I was beneath Praeneste's wall--
        Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
        And set whole heaps of conquer'd shields on fire;
        When Herilus in single fight I slew,
        Whom with three lives Feronia did endue."

                                               Dryden's Virgil, viii. 742.

  135 --_Sthenelus,_ a son of Capaneus, one of the Epigoni. He was one of
      the suitors of Helen, and is said to have been one of those who
      entered Troy inside the wooden horse.

  136 --_Forwarn'd the horrors._ The same portent has already been
      mentioned. To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this
      superstition.

  137 --_Sevenfold city,_ Boeotian Thebes, which had seven gates.

  138 --_As when the winds._

        "Thus, when a black-brow'd gust begins to rise,
        White foam at first on the curl'd ocean fries;
        Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies,
        Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
        The muddy billow o'er the clouds is thrown."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 736.

            139 "Stood
        Like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved;
        His stature reach'd the sky."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 986.

  140 The Abantes seem to have been of Thracian origin.

  141 I may, once for all, remark that Homer is most anatomically correct
      as to the parts of the body in which a wound would be immediately
      mortal.

  142 --_Cnus,_ a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness.

  143 Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7:

        "Nuovo favor del cielo in lui niluce
        E 'l fa grande, et angusto oltre il costume.
        Gl' empie d' honor la faccia, e vi riduce
        Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume."

          144 "Or deluges, descending on the plains,
        Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains
        Of lab'ring oxen, and the peasant's gains;
        Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away
        Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguish'd prey."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil ii. 408.

  145 --_From mortal mists._

          "But to nobler sights
        Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," xi. 411.

  146 --_The race of those._

        "A pair of coursers, born of heav'nly breed,
        Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;
        Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
        By substituting mares produced on earth,
        Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.

                                           Dryden's Virgil, vii. 386, sqq.

  147 The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier
      times, is by no means confined to Homer.

  148 --_Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor,_ or blood of the gods.

        "A stream of nect'rous humour issuing flow'd,
        Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," vi. 339.

  149 This was during the wars with the Titans.

  150 --_Amphitryon's son,_ Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of
      Amphitryon.

  151 --_Cgiale_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthon's
      Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in
      revenge for the wound she had received from her husband.

  152 --_Pherae,_ a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly.

  153 --_Tlepolemus,_ son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his native
      country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of
      Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here
      he was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his
      death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the
      victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar.

  154 These heroes' names have since passed into a kind of proverb,
      designating the _oi polloi_ or mob.

  155 --_Spontaneous open._

        "Veil'd with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light
        Flew through the midst of heaven; th' angelic quires,
        On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
        Through all th' empyreal road; till at the gate
        Of heaven arrived, the gate self-open'd wide,
        On golden hinges turning."

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 250.

          156 "Till Morn,
        Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
        Unbarr'd the gates of light."

                                                  --"Paradise Lost," vi, 2.

  157 --_Far as a shepherd._ "With what majesty and pomp does Homer exalt
      his deities! He here measures the leap of the horses by the extent
      of the world. And who is there, that, considering the exceeding
      greatness of the space would not with reason cry out that 'If the
      steeds of the deity were to take a second leap, the world would want
      room for it'?"--Longinus, Section 8.

  158 "No trumpets, or any other instruments of sound, are used in the
      Homeric action itself; but the trumpet was known, and is introduced
      for the purpose of illustration as employed in war. Hence arose the
      value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable
      officer... In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made
      of the service rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the
      battle of Honain was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas,
      the uncle of Mohammed," &c.--Coleridge, p. 213.

          159 "Long had the wav'ring god the war delay'd,
        While Greece and Troy alternate own'd his aid."

                                    Merrick's "Tryphiodorus," vi. 761, sq.

  160 --_Paeon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and
      Machaon were to the Grecian heroes.

  161 --_Arisbe,_ a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas.

  162 --_Pedasus,_ a town near Pylos.

  163 --_Rich heaps of brass._ "The halls of Alkinous and Menelaus glitter
      with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet
      unemployed metal--gold, copper, and iron are stored up in the
      treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is
      unknown in the Homeric age--the trade carried on being one of barter.
      In reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that
      the Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron,
      to be employed for arms, both offensive and defensive. By what
      process the copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the
      purpose of the warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for
      these objects belongs to a later age."--Grote, vol. ii. p. 142.

  164 --_Oh impotent,_ &c. "In battle, quarter seems never to have been
      given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon
      reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point
      of sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the
      sword."--Thirlwall, vol. i. p. 181

          165 "The ruthless steel, impatient of delay,
        Forbade the sire to linger out the day.
        It struck the bending father to the earth,
        And cropt the wailing infant at the birth.
        Can innocents the rage of parties know,
        And they who ne'er offended find a foe?"

                                                     Rowe's Lucan, bk. ii.

          166 "Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress'd with woe,
        To Pallas' fane in long procession go,
        In hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe:
        They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair,
        And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, i. 670

  167 The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well illustrated
      by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: "The poet's method
      of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious manner
      his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example,
      one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task
      is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain interval
      is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which
      interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
      continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
      while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
      account of the mission is resumed."

  168 --_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a
      hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
      times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

  169 --_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia.

  170 From this "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon, hypochondria received
      the name of "Morbus Bellerophonteus." See my notes in my prose
      translation, p. 112. The "Aleian field," _i.e._ "the plain of
      wandering," was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
      Cilicia.

  171 --_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common
      proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ left hand.

  173 --_In fifty chambers._

        "The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
        So large a promise of a progeny,)
        The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, ii.658

  174 --_O would kind earth,_ &c. "It is apparently a sudden, irregular
      burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he
      regrets that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a
      mantle of stones. This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal
      modes of punishment for great public offences. It may have been
      originally connected with the same feeling--the desire of avoiding
      the pollution of bloodshed--which seems to have suggested the
      practice of burying prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by
      their side. Though Homer makes no mention of this horrible usage,
      the example of the Roman Vestals affords reasons for believing that,
      in ascribing it to the heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic
      tradition."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq.

  175 --_Paris' lofty dome._ "With respect to the private dwellings, which
      are oftenest described, the poet's language barely enables us to
      form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no
      conception of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect
      on the eye. It seems indeed probable, from the manner in which he
      dwells on their metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of
      proportion was but little required or understood, and it is,
      perhaps, strength and convenience, rather than elegance, that he
      means to commend, in speaking of the fair house which Paris had
      built for himself with the aid of the most skilful masons of
      Troy."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 231.

  176 --_The wanton courser._

        "Come destrier, che da le regie stalle
          Ove a l'usa de l'arme si riserba,
        Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle
          Va tragl' armenti, o al fiume usato, o a l'herba."

                                                        Gier, Lib. ix. 75.

  177 --_Casque._ The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of
      which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind
      of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the
      helmet.

  178 --_Athenian maid:_ Minerva.

  179 --_Celadon,_ a river of Elis.

  180 --_Oileus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oileus, in contradistinction to
      Ajax, son of Telamon.

  181 --_In the general's helm._ It was customary to put the lots into a
      helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his
      choice.

  182 --_God of Thrace._ Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian
      epithet. Hence "Mavortia Moenia."

  183 --_Grimly he smiled._

          "And death
        Grinn'd horribly a ghastly smile."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 845.

          "There Mavors stands
        Grinning with ghastly feature."

                                                  --Carey's Dante: Hell, v.

          184 "Sete o guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,
        Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti,
        Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte
        Le ragioni, e 'l riposo, e de la notte."

                                                       --Gier. Lib. vi. 51.

  185 It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of
      food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
      See Virg. Cn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a "double
      portion." Gen. xliii. 34.

  186 --_Embattled walls._ "Another essential basis of mechanical unity in
      the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in the
      seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that
      the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during
      nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical
      one: 'So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to
      keep every foe at a distance.' The disasters consequent on his
      secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection.
      Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion
      occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent
      feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the
      Iliad, the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of
      it, forms the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem."--Mure,
      vol. i., p. 257.

  187 --_What cause of fear,_ &c.

        "Seest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain
        Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?"

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 304.

  188 --_In exchange._ These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the Roman
      lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Section 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
      mention of barter.

  189 "A similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the
      narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of
      the eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the
      battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is
      withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily
      in view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the
      specially authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two
      contumacious deities, described as boldly setting his commands at
      defiance, but checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while
      the other divine warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos
      are so active in support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly
      allude to the supreme edict as the cause of their present
      inactivity."--Mure, vol. i. p 257. See however, Muller, "Greek
      Literature," ch. v. Section 6, and Grote, vol. ii. p. 252.

          190 "As far removed from God and light of heaven,
        As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole."

                                                         --"Paradise Lost."

        "E quanto e da le stelle al basso inferno,
        Tanto e piu in su de la stellata spera"

                                                         --Gier. Lib. i. 7.

      "Some of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to
      imply that he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is not
      necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any
      such inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty
      pillars which keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from
      the manner in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth
      of Tartarus, that the region of light was thought to have certain
      bounds. The summit of the Thessalian Olympus was regarded as the
      highest point on the earth, and it is not always carefully
      distinguished from the aerian regions above The idea of a seat of
      the gods--perhaps derived from a more ancient tradition, in which it
      was not attached to any geographical site--seems to be indistinctly
      blended in the poet's mind with that of the real
      mountain."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 217, sq.

          191 "Now lately heav'n, earth, another world
        Hung e'er my realm, link'd in a golden chain
        To that side heav'n."

                                               --"Paradise Lost," ii. 1004.

  192 --_His golden scales._

        "Jove now, sole arbiter of peace and war,
        Held forth the fatal balance from afar:
        Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail,
        Till Troy descending fix'd the doubtful scale."

                                       Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.

        "Th' Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
        Hung forth in heav'n his golden scales,
        Wherein all things created first he weighed;
        The pendulous round earth, with balanced air
        In counterpoise; now ponders all events,
        Battles and realms. In these he puts two weights,
        The sequel each of parting and of fight:
        The latter quick up flew, and kick'd the beam."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," iv. 496.

  193 --_And now,_ &c.

          "And now all heaven
        Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;
        Had not th' Almighty Father, where he sits
        ... foreseen."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 669.

  194 --_Gerenian Nestor._ The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the name
      of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies
      honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B. 336; Strabo, viii. p.
      340.

  195 --_Cgae, Helice._ Both these towns were conspicuous for their worship
      of Neptune.

  196 --_As full blown,_ &c.

        "Il suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso,
        E in atto si gentil languir tremanti
        Gl' occhi, e cader siu 'l tergo il collo mira."

                                                        Gier. Lib. ix. 85.

  197 --_Ungrateful,_ because the cause in which they were engaged was
      unjust.

        "Struck by the lab'ring priests' uplifted hands
        The victims fall: to heav'n they make their pray'r,
        The curling vapours load the ambient air.
        But vain their toil: the pow'rs who rule the skies
        Averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 527, sqq.

          198 "As when about the silver moon, when aire is free from
                    winde,
        And stars shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on the
                    brows
        Of all steepe hills and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows,
        And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight;
        When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light,
        And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherd's
                    heart."

                                                                  Chapman.

  199 This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil. p. 358, was
      not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but "a great and
      general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval
      of Jove."

  200 Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and
      respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, "The
      Homeric Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with
      any power of peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the
      king, but solely for his information and guidance."

  201 In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive
      presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his
      exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the
      income of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot.
      iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, 'The feudal
      aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time
      answered the purpose.' (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189)
      This fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness.
      Plato, however, (De Rep. vi. 4), says, "We cannot commend Phoenix,
      the tutor of Achilles, as if he spoke correctly, when counselling
      him to accept of presents and assist the Greeks, but, without
      presents, not to desist from his wrath, nor again, should we commend
      Achilles himself, or approve of his being so covetous as to receive
      presents from Agamemnon," &c.

  202 It may be observed, that, brief as is the mention of Briseis in the
      Iliad, and small the part she plays--what little is said is
      pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of
      Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well
      contrasted with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero.

  203 --_Laodice._ Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer,
      among the daughters of Agamemnon.

  204 "Agamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns
      inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by
      presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in
      them, than an authority over them. And the same thing may be
      intimated when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the
      Dolopes of Phthia, on Phoenix."--Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i Section
      6, p. 162, note.

  205 --_Pray in deep silence._ Rather: "use well-omened words;" or, as
      Kennedy has explained it, "Abstain from expressions unsuitable to
      the solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might
      defeat the object of their supplications."

  206 --_Purest hands._ This is one of the most ancient superstitions
      respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
      tradition.

  207 It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in
      piratical expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of
      which Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident
      that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
      expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capital of Achilles' Thessalian domains.

  209 --_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the northern bank of the lake Cpais,
      which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of
      Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon" (Grote,
      vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
      "As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and
      kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of
      alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels
      came to be either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy,
      the water accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more
      than one ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of
      Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount
      Hyphanteion." (Ibid.)

  210 The phrase "hundred gates," &c., seems to be merely expressive of a
      great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162.

  211 Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Select
      Translations, p 88).--

          "Many gifts he gave, and o'er
        Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms
        He brought an infant, on my bosom laid
        The precious charge, and anxiously enjoin'd
        That I should rear thee as my own with all
        A parent's love. I fail'd not in my trust
        And oft, while round my neck thy hands were lock'd,
        From thy sweet lips the half articulate sound
        Of Father came; and oft, as children use,
        Mewling and puking didst thou drench my tunic."

      "This description," observes my learned friend (notes, p. 121) "is
      taken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating which, Pope,
      with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age
      of Anne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting)
      circumstance."

          "And the wine
        Held to thy lips, and many a time in fits
        Of infant frowardness the purple juice
        Rejecting thou hast deluged all my vest,
        And fill'd my bosom."

                                                                  --Cowper.

  212 --_Where Calydon._ For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too
      long to be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for
      the authorities, see my notes to the prose translation, p. 166.

  213 "_Gifts can conquer_"--It is well observed by Bishop Thirlwall,
      "Greece," vol. i. p, 180, that the law of honour among the Greeks
      did not compel them to treasure up in their memory the offensive
      language which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary,
      nor to conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away
      by blood. Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing
      to accept a pecuniary compensation."

  214 "The boon of sleep."--Milton

          215 "All else of nature's common gift partake:
        Unhappy Dido was alone awake."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, iv. 767.

  216 --_The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus.

  217 --_Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of woollen stuffing, pressed in
      between the straps, to protect the head, and make the helmet fit
      close.

  218 "All the circumstances of this action--the night, Rhesus buried in a
      profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand hanging over
      the head of that prince--furnished Homer with the idea of this
      fiction, which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were,
      beholding his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom.
      This image is very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no
      farther than to see confusedly what environs him, and to think it
      not a reality but a dream."--Pope.

        "There's one did laugh in his sleep, and one cry'd murder;
        They wak'd each other."

                                                               --_Macbeth._

          219 "Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
        And beams of early light the heavens o'erspread."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, iv. 639

  220 --_Red drops of blood._ "This phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the
      poet's imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched. It is one,
      however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in
      the climate of Greece."--Mure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix.
      15:

        "La terra in vece del notturno gelo
        Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne."

          221 "No thought of flight,
        None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
        That argued fear."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 236.

  222 --_One of love._ Although a bastard brother received only a small
      portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated. Priam
      appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in
      the Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note.

          223 "Circled with foes as when a packe of bloodie jackals cling
        About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a hunter's bow
        Whose escape his nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth
                    flow,
        And his light knees have power to move: but (maistred by his
                    wound)
        Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round,
        And teare his flesh--when instantly fortune sends in the powers
        Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours.
        So they around Ulysses prest."

                                                                 --Chapman.

  224 --_Simois, railing,_ &c.

          "In those bloody fields
        Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
        Of heroes."

                                                 --Dryden's Virgil, i. 142.

          225 "Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
        Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
        Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
        Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,
        And heaves the building from the solid base."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, ii. 825.

  226 --_Why boast we._

          "Wherefore do I assume
        These royalties and not refuse to reign,
        Refusing to accept as great a share
        Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him
        Who reigns, and so much to him due
        Of hazard more, as he above the rest
        High honour'd sits."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 450.

  227 --_Each equal weight._

          "Long time in even scale
        The battle hung."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," vi. 245.

          228 "He on his impious foes right onward drove,
        _Gloomy as night._"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," vi. 831

  229 --_Renown'd for justice and for length of days,_ Arrian. de Exp.
      Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people,
      which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness.
      Some authors have regarded the phrase "Hippomolgian," _i.e._
      "milking their mares," as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes,
      since the oldest of the Samatian nomads made their mares' milk one
      of their chief articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this
      passage, has occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as
      we read it, either "long-lived," or "bowless," the latter epithet
      indicating that they did not depend upon archery for subsistence.

  230 Compare Chapman's quaint, bold verses:--

        "And as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winter's flood
        Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,
        Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock,
        Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke,
        And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,
        And then (tho' never so impelled), it stirs not any way:--
        So Hector,--"

  231 This book forms a most agreeable interruption to The continuous
      round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is
      as well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many
      notes unnecessary.

  232 --_Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed.

  233 Compare Tasso:--

        Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille
        Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
        Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille
        Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci."

                                                        Gier. Lib. xvi. 25

  234 Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando Furioso,
      bk. vi.

          235 "Twice seven, the charming daughters of the main--
        Around my person wait, and bear my train:
        Succeed my wish, and second my design,
        The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine."

                                         Dryden's Virgil, Cn. i. 107, seq.

  236 --_And Minos._ "By Homer, Minos is described as the son of Jupiter,
      and of the daughter of Phoenix, whom all succeeding authors name
      Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
      Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
      Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
      his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
      recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of
      Asterius, as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus
      connected with a colony said to have been led into Creta by
      Tentamus, or Tectamus, son of Dorus, who is related either to have
      crossed over from Thessaly, or to have embarked at Malea after
      having led his followers by land into Laconia."--Thirlwall, p. 136,
      seq.

  237 Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
      first parents:--

          "Underneath the violet,
        Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
        'Broider'd the ground."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 700.

  238 --_He lies protected,_

        "Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
        By angels many and strong, who interpos'd
        Defence, while others bore him on their shields
        Back to his chariot, where it stood retir'd
        From off the files of war; there they him laid,
        Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame."

                                            "Paradise Lost," vi. 335, seq.

  239 --_The brazen dome._ See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

  240 --_For, by the gods! who flies._ Observe the bold ellipsis of "he
      cries," and the transition from the direct to the oblique
      construction. So in Milton:--

        "Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood,
        Both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd
        The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
        Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe,
        And starry pole.--Thou also mad'st the night,
        Maker omnipotent, and thou the day."

                                         Milton, "Paradise Lost," Book iv.

  241 --_So some tall rock._

        "But like a rock unmov'd, a rock that braves
        The raging tempest, and the rising waves--
        Propp'd on himself he stands: his solid sides
        Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 809.

  242 Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he
      leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the
      Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on
      Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in
      the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus.

  243 --_His best beloved._ The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall
      (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the
      friendship subsisting between these two heroes--

      "One of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character,
      is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate and
      durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the
      earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
      comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
      the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
      maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
      companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
      traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
      same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
      wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
      die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
      not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
      which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
      description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
      presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
      Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
      owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
      dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
      period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
      Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose
      love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his
      higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which
      united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, though, as
      the persons themselves are less important, it is kept more in the
      back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the same light. The
      idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought complete,
      without such a brother in arms by his side."--Thirlwall, Greece, vol.
      i. p. 176, seq.

          244 "As hungry wolves with raging appetite,
        Scour through the fields, ne'er fear the stormy night--
        Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
        And long to temper their dry chaps in blood--
        So rush'd we forth at once."

                                                --Dryden's Virgil, ii. 479.

  245 --_The destinies ordain._--"In the mythology, also, of the Iliad,
      purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously
      involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly
      equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter
      is popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is
      assigned to fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men
      is absolute and uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character
      of the Homeric deity, and it is very necessary that the student of
      Greek literature should bear it constantly in mind. A strong
      instance in the Iliad itself to illustrate this position, is the
      passage where Jupiter laments to Juno the approaching death of
      Sarpedon. 'Alas me!' says he 'since it is fated (moira) that
      Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should be slain by Patroclus, the
      son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is divided within me while I
      ruminate it in my mind, whether having snatched him up from out of
      the lamentable battle, I should not at once place him alive in the
      fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether I should now destroy him
      by the hands of the son of Menoetius!' To which Juno answers--'Dost
      thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man, long since destined by
      fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do it--but we, the rest of the gods,
      do not sanction it.' Here it is clear from both speakers, that
      although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter might still,
      if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the reach of
      any such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter
      himself would destroy him by the hands of another."--Coleridge, p.
      156. seq.

  246 --_Thrice at the battlements._ "The art military of the Homeric age
      is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
      personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
      ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights
      of romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
      captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a
      ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself
      was accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of
      earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in
      armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
      assistance from their allies to the very end."--Coleridge, p. 212.

  247 --_Ciconians._--A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

  248 --_They wept._

        "Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
        And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
        He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
        Weeps his associates and his master slain."

                                         Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

        "Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
        But pensive herds that for their master low,
        Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
        Unmindful of their pasture and their love."

                                         Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

        "To close the pomp, Cthon, the steed of state,
        Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
        Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
        He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, bk. ii

  249 --_Some brawny bull._

        "Like to a bull, that with impetuous spring
        Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow
        Hath struck him, but unable to proceed
        Plunges on either side."

                                             --Carey's Dante: Hell, c. xii.

  250 This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the regular
      narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and the
      lamentations of Achilles.

  251 --_Far in the deep._ So Oceanus hears the lamentations of Prometheus,
      in the play of Cschylus, and comes from the depths of the sea to
      comfort him.

  252 Opuntia, a city of Locris.

  253 Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his
      description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr.
      Dyce's version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be
      introduced.

        "In the wide circle of the shield were seen
        Refulgent images of various forms,
        The work of Vulcan; who had there described
        The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,
        The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart
        In different stations; and you there might view
        The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven,
        And, under them, the vast expanse of air,
        In which, with outstretch'd wings, the long-beak'd bird
        Winnow'd the gale, as if instinct with life.
        Around the shield the waves of ocean flow'd,
        The realms of Tethys, which unnumber'd streams,
        In azure mazes rolling o'er the earth,
        Seem'd to augment."

  254 --_On seats of stone._ "Several of the old northern Sagas represent
      the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great
      stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring"-- Grote,
      ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in The
      heroic times, see Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

  255 --_Another part,_ &c.

          "And here
        Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
        Were heroes lying with their slaughter'd steeds
        Upon the ground incarnadin'd with blood.
        Stern stalked Bellona, smear'd with reeking gore,
        Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
        And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
        Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
        Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
        Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
        Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
        And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
        That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
        Such were the horrors of dire war."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  256 --_A field deep furrowed._

        "Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,
        Each with a sharp-tooth'd sickle in his hand,
        Work'd busily, and, as the harvest fell,
        Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
        Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
        The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
        The plough were drawing, and the furrow'd glebe
        Was black behind them, while with goading wand
        The active youths impell'd them. Here a feast
        Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
        A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
        As if endued with life."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  257 Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
      compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
      Hesiod. He remarks that, "with two or three exceptions, the imagery
      differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the
      difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether
      for the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs
      no exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the
      work. The Hesiodic images are huddled together without connection or
      congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the
      Centaurs and Lapithae;-- but the gap is wide indeed between them and
      Apollo with the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial
      harmonies; whence however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the
      Gorgons, and other images of war, over an arm of the sea, in which
      the sporting dolphins, the fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the
      shore with his casting net, are minutely represented. As to the
      Hesiodic images themselves, the leading remark is, that they catch
      at beauty by ornament, and at sublimity by exaggeration; and upon
      the untenable supposition of the genuineness of this poem, there is
      this curious peculiarity, that, in the description of scenes of
      rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is decisive--while in those of
      war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps, that the Hesiodic poet
      has more than once the advantage."

  258 "This legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in the
      Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas
      familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes
      and the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned
      subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the
      Hellenes,--a being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by
      Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the
      commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
      reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are
      brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives
      in marriage Hebe."--Grote, vol. i. p. 128.

  259 --_Ambrosia._

          "The blue-eyed maid,
        In ev'ry breast new vigour to infuse.
        Brings nectar temper'd with ambrosial dews."

                                          Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

  260 "Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
      stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
      upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
      cloud is not rent under them." Job xxvi. 6-8.

          261 "Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
        All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,
        Slain by Jove's wrath, and led by Hermes' rod,
        Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

  262 These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be
      delayed, but never wholly set aside.

  263 It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to
      behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

          264 "Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose,
        In humble vales they built their soft abodes."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, iii. 150.

  265 --_Along the level seas._ Compare Virgil's description of Camilla,
      who

        "Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain,
        Flew o'er the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
        She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along,
        Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung."

                                                        Dryden, vii. 1100.

  266 --_The future father._ "Cneas and Antenor stand distinguished from
      the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy
      with the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as
      treacherous collusion,--a suspicion indirectly glanced at, though
      emphatically repelled, in the Cneas of Virgil."--Grote, i. p. 427.

  267 Neptune thus recounts his services to Cneas:

        "When your Cneas fought, but fought with odds
        Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
        I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
        Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secured his flight--
        Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
        The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, v. 1058.

  268 --_On Polydore._ Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that Polydore
      was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for protection,
      being the youngest of Priam's sons, and that he was treacherously
      murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent with him.

  269 "Perhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of poetical
      fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the Iliad,
      he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles, and
      afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the hero's aid. The
      overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation in
      the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
      Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to
      be easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
      mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
      suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
      Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same
      ready explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the
      flood at the critical moment when the hero's destruction appeared
      imminent, might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel,
      be ascribed to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all
      atmospheric moisture."--Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

  270 Wood has observed, that "the circumstance of a falling tree, which
      is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other, affords
      a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander."

  271 --_Ignominious._ Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of
      battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

  272 --_Beneath a caldron._

        "So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
        The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
        Above the brims they force their fiery way;
        Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 644.

  273 "This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order
      of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently
      among the incidents of the Mythical world."--Grote, vol. i. p. 156.

  274 --_Not half so dreadful._

          "On the other side,
        Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
        Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
        That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
        In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
        Shakes pestilence and war."

                                                 --Paradise Lost," xi. 708.

  275 "And thus his own undaunted mind explores."--"Paradise Lost," vi.
      113.

  276 The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties of
      the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a
      princess, in the heroic times.

  277 --_Hesper shines with keener light._

        "Fairest of stars, last in the train of night,
        If better thou belong not to the dawn."

                                                  "Paradise Lost," v. 166.

  278 Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he was
      slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the
      unerring auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the
      Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued
      and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
      Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it
      with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
      immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine.

  279 --_Astyanax,_ i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that
      Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have
      copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus.

  280 This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book, but
      it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for
      comparison.

  281 --_Thrice in order led._ This was a frequent rite at funerals. The
      Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio._ Plutarch
      states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to
      the memory of Achilles himself.

  282 --_And swore._ Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
      witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436.

          283 "O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
        Art thou so late return'd for our defence?
        Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
        With length of labours, and with, toils of war?
        After so many funerals of thy own,
        Art thou restored to thy declining town?
        But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
        Deforms the manly features of thy face?"

                                                          Dryden, xi. 369.

  284 --_Like a thin smoke._ Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

        "In vain I reach my feeble hands to join
        In sweet embraces--ah! no longer thine!
        She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
        Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air."

                                                                   Dryden.

  285 So Milton:--

          "So eagerly the fiend
        O'er bog, o'er steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
        With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
        And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," ii. 948.

          286 "An ancient forest, for the work design'd
        (The shady covert of the savage kind).
        The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
        Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the tow'ring pride
        Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
        And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
        High trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown
        Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, vi. 261.

  287 --_He vowed._ This was a very ancient custom.

  288 The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity of
      the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

  289 On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern nations,
      see Mallet, p. 213.

  290 --_And calls the spirit._ Such was the custom anciently, even at the
      Roman funerals.

        "Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
        Paternal ashes, now revived in vain."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 106.

  291 Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better moral
      from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
      comparison:--

        "The haughty Dares in the lists appears:
        Walking he strides, his head erected bears:
        His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
        And loud applauses echo through the field.
        *          *          *          *
        Such Dares was, and such he strode along,
        And drew the wonder of the gazing throng
        His brawny breast and ample chest he shows;
        His lifted arms around his head he throws,
        And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
        His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,
        No one dares answer to the proud demand.
        Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
        Already he devours the promised prize.
        *          *          *          *
        If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
        How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?"

                                             Dryden's Virgil, v. 486, seq.

          292 "The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
        His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
        His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood,
        And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 623.

  293 "Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in
      the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
      object of great interest with the subsequent poets."--Grote, i, p.
      399.

  294 Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of Gabriel,
      "Paradise Lost," bk. v. 266, seq.

          "Down thither prone in flight
        He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
        Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
        Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
        Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
        *           *               *             *
        At once on th' eastern cliff of Paradise
        He lights, and to his proper shape returns
        A seraph wing'd. * * * *
          Like Maia's son he stood,
        And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fill'd
        The circuit wide."

      Virgil, Cn. iv. 350:--

        "Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
        His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
        And whether o'er the seas or earth he flies,
        With rapid force they bear him down the skies
        But first he grasps within his awful hand
        The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
        With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves;
        With this he drives them from the Stygian waves:
        *           *               *             *
        Thus arm'd, the god begins his airy race,
        And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space."

                                                                   Dryden.

  295 In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of
      Coleridge are well worth reading:--

      "By a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of
      expressing everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most
      peculiar and difficult situations, and to extricate himself from
      them with the completest success. The whole scene between Achilles
      and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose
      of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly
      skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the
      Iliad. Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of
      Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if
      genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil
      the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this
      account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is
      called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the
      poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of
      Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in
      gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and,
      lastly, mentioning Hector's name when he perceives that the hero is
      softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of
      the conqueror. The ego d'eleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha
      geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
      Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
      defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
      name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
      only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse
      it into another language."--Coleridge, p. 195.

  296 "Achilles' ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but
      offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
      age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
      vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated
      by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that
      evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured
      man; but made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the
      fate of the body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the
      rites essential to the soul's admission into the more favoured
      regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on
      the dreary shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost
      of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own
      obsequies, shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his
      destroyer must have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which,
      even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
      Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks
      pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights
      of retribution."--Mure, vol. i. 289.

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

        "Here, from the tow'r by stern Ulysses thrown,
        Andromache bewail'd her infant son."

                                           Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

  298 The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and
      interesting view of Helen's character--

      "Few things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
      that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
      also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is through
      the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech, noble in
      her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which higher
      powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate towards those
      with whom that fault had committed her. I have always thought the
      following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and hints at her own
      invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as almost the sweetest
      passage in the poem. It is another striking instance of that
      refinement of feeling and softness of tone which so generally
      distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the rest."--Classic
      Poets, p. 198, seq.

  299 "And here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
      exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
      him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
      his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
      influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of
      his great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a
      few short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself
      to be suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.

      The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the
      Iliad, to the speedy termination of its hero's course, and the moral
      on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among the
      finest evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the whole
      framework of the poem is united."--Mure, vol. i. p 201.

  300 Cowper says,--"I cannot take my leave of this noble poem without
      expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It
      is like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has
      entertained magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not
      contemptuous, yet without much ceremony." Coleridge, p. 227,
      considers the termination of "Paradise Lost" somewhat similar.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***



CREDITS


July 2004

            Posted to Project Gutenberg
            Anne Soulard,
            Juliet Sutherland,
            Charles Franks, and
            The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

September 2006

            Converted to PGTEI v.04
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 6130-8.txt or 6130-8.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/1/3/6130/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Germinal, by mile Zola

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Germinal

Author: mile Zola

Translator: Havelock Ellis

Release Date: February 8, 2018 [EBook #56528]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMINAL ***




Produced by Dagny and Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature




GERMINAL

BY

MILE ZOLA


Translated and Introduced

By

Havelock Ellis


Translated and Introduced by Havelock Ellis

J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.

Aldine House--Bedford St.--London

1885




Introduction By Havelock Ellis


'GERMINAL' was published in 1885, after occupying Zola during the
previous year. In accordance with his usual custom--but to a greater
extent than with any other of his books except _La Dbcle_--he
accumulated material beforehand. For six months he travelled about
the coal-mining district in northern France and Belgium, especially
the Borinage around Mons, note-book in hand. 'He was inquisitive, was
that gentleman', miner told Sherard who visited the neighbourhood at a
later period and found that the miners in every village knew _Germinal_.
That was a tribute of admiration the book deserved, but it was never
one of Zola's most popular novels; it was neither amusing enough nor
outrageous enough to attract the multitude.

Yet _Germinal_ occupies a place among Zola's works which is constantly
becoming more assured, so that to some critics it even begins to seem
the only book of his that in the end may survive. In his own time, as
we know, the accredited critics of the day could find no condemnation
severe enough for Zola. Brunetire attacked him perpetually with a fury
that seemed inexhaustible; Schrer could not even bear to hear his name
mentioned; Anatole France, though he lived to relent, thought it would
have been better if he had never been born. Even at that time, however,
there were critics who inclined to view Germinal more favourably. Thus
Faguet, who was the recognized academic critic of the end of the last
century, while he held that posterity would be unable to understand how
Zola could ever have been popular, yet recognized him as in Germinal
the heroic representative of democracy, incomparable in his power of
describing crowds, and he realized how marvellous is the conclusion of
this book.

To-day, when critics view Zola In the main with indifference rather
than with horror, although he still retains his popular favour, the
distinction of _Germinal_ is yet more clearly recognized. Seillire,
while regarding the capitalistic conditions presented as now of an
ancient and almost extinct type, yet sees _Germinal_ standing out as
'the poem of social mysticism', while Andr Gide, a completely modern
critic who has left a deep mark on the present generation, observes
somewhere that it may nowadays cause surprise that he should refer with
admiration to _Germinal_, but it is a masterly book that fills him with
astonishment; he can hardly believe that it was written in French and
still less that it should have been written in any other language; it
seems that it should have been created in some international tongue.

The high place thus claimed for _Germinal_ will hardly seem exaggerated.
The book was produced when Zola had at length achieved the full mastery
of his art and before his hand had, as in his latest novels, begun to
lose its firm grasp. The subject lent itself, moreover, to his special
aptitude for presenting in vivid outline great human groups, and to his
special sympathy with the collective emotions and social aspirations of
such groups. We do not, as so often in Zola's work, become painfully
conscious that he is seeking to reproduce aspects of life with which
he is imperfectly acquainted, or fitting them into scientific formulas
which he has imperfectly understood. He shows a masterly grip of each
separate group, and each represents some essential element of the
whole; they are harmoniously balanced, and their mutual action and
reaction leads on inevitably to the splendid tragic dose, with yet its
great promise for the future. I will not here discuss Zola's literary
art (I have done so in my book of _Affirmations_); it is enough to say
that, though he was not a great master of style, Zola never again wrote
so finely as here.

A word may be added to explain how this translation fell to the lot of
one whose work has been in other fields. In 1893 the late A. Texeira de
Mattos was arranging for private issue a series of complete versions of
some of Zola's chief novels and offered to assign _Germinal_ to me. My
time was taken up with preliminary but as yet unfruitful preparation
for what I regarded as my own special task in life, and I felt that I
must not neglect the opportunity of spending my spare time in making
a modest addition to my income. My wife readily fell into the project
and agreed, on the understanding that we shared the proceeds, to act
as my amanuensis. So, in the little Cornish cottage over the sea we
then occupied, the evenings of the early months of 1894 were spent
over _Germinal_, I translating aloud, and she with swift efficient
untiring pen following, now and then bettering my English dialogue
with her pungent wit. In this way I was able to gain a more minute
insight into the details of Zola's work, and a more impressive vision
of the massive structure he here raised, than can easily be acquired
by the mere reader. That joint task has remained an abidingly pleasant
memory. It is, moreover, a satisfaction to me to know that I have
been responsible, however inadequately, for the only complete English
version of this wonderful book, 'a great fresco,' as Zola himself
called it, a great prose epic, as it has seemed to some, worthy to
compare with the great verse epics of old.




PART ONE




CHAPTER I


Over the open plain, beneath a starless sky as dark and thick as ink,
a man walked alone along the highway from Marchiennes to Montsou, a
straight paved road ten kilometres in length, intersecting the beetroot
fields. He could not even see the black soil before him, and only felt
the immense flat horizon by the gusts of March wind, squalls as strong
as on the sea, and frozen from sweeping leagues of marsh and naked
earth. No tree could be seen against the sky, and the road unrolled as
straight as a pier in the midst of the blinding spray of darkness.

The man had set out from Marchiennes about two o'clock. He walked with
long strides, shivering beneath his worn cotton jacket and corduroy
breeches. A small parcel tied in a check handkerchief troubled him
much, and he pressed it against his side, sometimes with one elbow,
sometimes with the other, so that he could slip to the bottom of his
pockets both the benumbed hands that bled beneath the lashes of the
wind. A single idea occupied his head--the empty head of a workman
without work and without lodging--the hope that the cold would be less
keen after sunrise. For an hour he went on thus, when on the left, two
kilometres from Montsou, he saw red flames, three fires burning in the
open air and apparently suspended. At first he hesitated, half afraid.
Then he could not resist the painful need to warm his hands for a
moment.

The steep road led downwards, and everything disappeared. The man saw
on his right a paling, a wall of coarse planks shutting in a line of
rails, while a grassy slope rose on the left surmounted by confused
gables, a vision of a village with low uniform roofs. He went on
some two hundred paces. Suddenly, at a bend in the road, the fires
reappeared close to him, though he could not understand how they
burnt so high in the dead sky, like smoky moons. But on the level
soil another sight had struck him. It was a heavy mass, a low pile
of buildings from which rose the silhouette of a factory chimney;
occasional gleams appeared from dirty windows, five or six melancholy
lanterns were hung outside to frames of blackened wood, which vaguely
outlined the profiles of gigantic stages; and from this fantastic
apparition, drowned in night and smoke, a single voice arose, the
thick, long breathing of a steam escapement that could not be seen.

Then the man recognized a pit. His despair returned. What was the
good? There would be no work. Instead of turning towards the buildings
he decided at last to ascend the pit bank, on which burnt in iron
baskets the three coal fires which gave light and warmth for work. The
labourers in the cutting must have been working late; they were still
throwing out the useless rubbish. Now he heard the landers push the
wagons on the stages. He could distinguish living shadows tipping over
the trams or tubs near each fire.

"Good day," he said, approaching one of the baskets.

Turning his back to the fire, the carman stood upright. He was an old
man, dressed in knitted violet wool with a rabbit-skin cap on his head;
while his horse, a great yellow horse, waited with the immobility of
stone while they emptied the six trains he drew. The workman employed
at the tipping-cradle, a red-haired lean fellow, did not hurry himself;
he pressed on the lever with a sleepy hand. And above, the wind grew
stronger--an icy north wind--and its great, regular breaths passed by
like the strokes of a scythe.

"Good day," replied the old man. There was silence. The man, who felt
that he was being looked at suspiciously, at once told his name.

"I am called tienne Lantier. I am an engine-man. Any work here?"

The flames lit him up. He might be about twenty-one years of age, a
very dark, handsome man, who looked strong in spite of his thin limbs.

The carman, thus reassured, shook his head.

"Work for an engine-man? No, no! There were two came yesterday. There's
nothing."

A gust cut short their speech. Then tienne asked, pointing to the
sombre pile of buildings at the foot of the platform:

"A pit, isn't it?"

The old man this time could not reply: he was strangled by a violent
cough. At last he expectorated, and his expectoration left a black
patch on the purple soil.

"Yes, a pit. The Voreux. There! The settlement is quite near."

In his turn, and with extended arm, he pointed out in the night the
village of which the young man had vaguely seen the roofs. But the six
trams were empty, and he followed them without cracking his whip, his
legs stiffened by rheumatism; while the great yellow horse went on of
itself, pulling heavily between the rails beneath a new gust which
bristled its coat.

The Voreux was now emerging from the gloom. tienne, who forgot himself
before the stove, warming his poor bleeding hands, looked round and
could see each part of the pit: the shed tarred with siftings, the
pit-frame, the vast chamber of the winding machine, the square turret
of the exhaustion pump. This pit, piled up in the bottom of a hollow,
with its squat brick buildings, raising its chimney like a threatening
horn, seemed to him to have the evil air of a gluttonous beast
crouching there to devour the earth. While examining it, he thought of
himself, of his vagabond existence these eight days he had been seeking
work. He saw himself again at his workshop at the railway, delivering
a blow at his foreman, driven from Lille, driven from everywhere. On
Saturday he had arrived at Marchiennes, where they said that work was
to be had at the Forges, and there was nothing, neither at the Forges
nor at Sonneville's. He had been obliged to pass the Sunday hidden
beneath the wood of a cartwright's yard, from which the watchman had
just turned him out at two o'clock in the morning. He had nothing, not
a penny, not even a crust; what should he do, wandering along the roads
without aim, not knowing where to shelter himself from the wind? Yes,
it was certainly a pit; the occasional lanterns lighted up the square;
a door, suddenly opened, had enabled him to catch sight of the furnaces
in a clear light. He could explain even the escapement of the pump,
that thick, long breathing that went on without ceasing, and which
seemed to be the monster's congested respiration.

The workman, expanding his back at the tipping-cradle, had not even
lifted his eyes on tienne, and the latter was about to pick up his
little bundle, which had fallen to the earth, when a spasm of coughing
announced the carman's return. Slowly he emerged from the darkness,
followed by the yellow horse drawing six more laden trams.

"Are there factories at Montsou?" asked the young man.

The old man expectorated, then replied in the wind:

"Oh, it isn't factories that are lacking. Should have seen it three or
four years ago. Everything was roaring then. There were not men enough;
there never were such wages. And now they are tightening their bellies
again. Nothing but misery in the country; every one is being sent away;
workshops closing one after the other. It is not the Emperor's fault,
perhaps; but why should he go and fight in America? without counting
that the beasts are dying from cholera, like the people."

Then, in short sentences and with broken breath, the two continued to
complain. tienne narrated his vain wanderings of the past week: must
one, then, die of hunger? Soon the roads would be full of beggars.

"Yes," said the old man, "this will turn out badly, for God does not
allow so many Christians to be thrown on the street."

"We don't have meat every day."

"But if one had bread!"

"True, if one only had bread."

Their voices were lost, gusts of wind carrying away the words in a
melancholy howl.

"Here!" began the carman again very loudly, turning towards the south.
"Montsou is over there."

And stretching out his hand again he pointed out invisible spots in the
darkness as he named them. Below, at Montsou, the Fauvelle sugar works
were still going, but the Hoton sugar works had just been dismissing
hands; there were only the Dutilleul flour mill and the Bleuze rope
walk for mine-cables which kept up. Then, with a large gesture he
indicated the north half of the horizon: the Sonneville workshops had
not received two-thirds of their usual orders; only two of the three
blast furnaces of the Marchiennes Forges were alight; finally, at the
Gagebois glass works a strike was threatening, for there was talk of a
reduction of wages.

"I know, I know," replied the young man at each indication. "I have
been there."

"With us here things are going on at present," added the carman; "but
the pits have lowered their output. And see opposite, at the Victoire,
there are also only two batteries of coke furnaces alight."

He expectorated, and set out behind his sleepy horse, after harnessing
it to the empty trams.

Now tienne could oversee the entire country. The darkness remained
profound, but the old man's hand had, as it were, filled it with great
miseries, which the young man unconsciously felt at this moment around
him everywhere in the limitless tract. Was it not a cry of famine
that the March wind rolled up across this naked plain? The squalls
were furious: they seemed to bring the death of labour, a famine
which would kill many men. And with wandering eyes he tried to pierce
shades, tormented at once by the desire and by the fear of seeing.
Everything was hidden in the unknown depths of the gloomy night. He
only perceived, very far off, the blast furnaces and the coke ovens.
The latter, with their hundreds of chimneys, planted obliquely, made
lines of red flame; while the two towers, more to the left, burnt blue
against the blank sky, like giant torches. It resembled a melancholy
conflagration. No other stars rose on the threatening horizon except
these nocturnal fires in a land of coal and iron.

"You belong to Belgium, perhaps?" began again the carman, who had
returned behind tienne.

This time he only brought three trams. Those at least could be tipped
over; an accident which had happened to the cage, a broken screw nut,
would stop work for a good quarter of an hour. At the bottom of the pit
bank there was silence; the landers no longer shook the stages with a
prolonged vibration. One only heard from the pit the distant sound of a
hammer tapping on an iron plate.

"No, I come from the South," replied the young man.

The workman, after having emptied the trams, had seated himself on the
earth, glad of the accident, maintaining his savage silence; he had
simply lifted his large, dim eyes to the carman, as if annoyed by so
many words. The latter, indeed, did not usually talk at such length.
The unknown man's face must have pleased him that he should have been
taken by one of these itchings for confidence which sometimes make old
people talk aloud even when alone.

"I belong to Montsou," he said, "I am called Bonnemort."

"Is it a nickname?" asked tienne, astonished.

The old man made a grimace of satisfaction and pointed to the Voreux:

"Yes, yes; they have pulled me three times out of that, torn to pieces,
once with all my hair scorched, once with my gizzard full of earth, and
another time with my belly swollen with water, like a frog. And then,
when they saw that nothing would kill me, they called me Bonnemort for
a joke."

His cheerfulness increased, like the creaking of an ill-greased pulley,
and ended by degenerating into a terrible spasm of coughing. The fire
basket now clearly lit up his large head, with its scanty white hair
and flat, livid face, spotted with bluish patches. He was short, with
an enormous neck, projecting calves and heels, and long arms, with
massive hands falling to his knees. For the rest, like his horse, which
stood immovable, without suffering from the wind, he seemed to be
made of stone; he had no appearance of feeling either the cold or the
gusts that whistled at his ears. When he coughed his throat was torn
by a deep rasping; he spat at the foot of the basket and the earth was
blackened.

tienne looked at him and at the ground which he had thus stained.

"Have you been working long at the mine?"

Bonnemort flung open both arms.

"Long? I should think so. I was not eight when I went down into the
Voreux and I am now fifty-eight. Reckon that up! I have been everything
down there; at first trammer, then putter, when I had the strength to
wheel, then pikeman for eighteen years. Then, because of my cursed
legs, they put me into the earth cutting, to bank up and patch, until
they had to bring me up, because the doctor said I should stay there
for good. Then, after five years of that, they made me carman. Eh?
that's fine--fifty years at the mine, forty-five down below."

While he was speaking, fragments of burning coal, which now and then
fell from the basket, lit up his pale face with their red reflection.

"They tell me to rest," he went on, "but I'm not going to; I'm not such
a fool. I can get on for two years longer, to my sixtieth, so as to get
the pension of one hundred and eighty francs. If I wished them good
evening to-day they would give me a hundred and fifty at once. They are
cunning, the beggars. Besides, I am sound, except my legs. You see,
it's the water which has got under my skin through being always wet in
the cuttings. There are days when I can't move a paw without screaming."

A spasm of coughing interrupted him again.

"And that makes you cough so?" said tienne.

But he vigorously shook his head. Then, when he could speak:

"No, no! I caught cold a month ago. I never used to cough; now I can't
get rid of it. And the queer thing is that I spit, that I spit----"

The rasping was again heard in his throat, followed by the black
expectoration.

"Is it blood?" asked tienne, at last venturing to question him.

Bonnemort slowly wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.

"It's coal. I've got enough in my carcass to warm me till I die. And
it's five years since I put a foot down below. I stored it up, it
seems, without knowing it; it keeps you alive!"

There was silence. The distant hammer struck regular blows in the
pit, and the wind passed by with its moan, like a cry of hunger and
weariness coming out of the depths of the night. Before the flames
which grew low, the old man went on in lower tones, chewing over again
his old recollections. Ah, certainly: it was not yesterday that he and
his began hammering at the seam. The family had worked for the Montsou
Mining Company since it started, and that was long ago, a hundred and
six years already. His grandfather, Guillaume Maheu, an urchin of
fifteen then, had found the rich coal at Rquillart, the Company's
first pit, an old abandoned pit to-day down below near the Fauvelle
sugar works. All the country knew it, and as a proof, the discovered
seam was called the Guillaume, after his grandfather. He had not known
him--a big fellow, it was said, very strong, who died of old age at
sixty. Then his father, Nicolas Maheu, called Le Rouge, when hardly
forty years of age had died in the pit, which was being excavated at
that time: a landslip, a complete slide, and the rock drank his blood
and swallowed his bones. Two of his uncles and his three brothers,
later on, also left their skins there. He, Vincent Maheu, who had come
out almost whole, except that his legs were rather shaky, was looked
upon as a knowing fellow. But what could one do? One must work; one
worked here from father to son, as one would work at anything else.
His son, Toussaint Maheu, was being worked to death there now, and his
grandsons, and all his people, who lived opposite in the settlement.
A hundred and six years of mining, the youngsters after the old ones,
for the same master. Eh? there were many bourgeois that could not give
their history so well!

"Anyhow, when one has got enough to eat!" murmured tienne again.

"That is what I say. As long as one has bread to eat one can live."

Bonnemort was silent; and his eyes turned towards the settlement, where
lights were appearing one by one. Four o'clock struck in the Montsou
tower and the cold became keener.

"And is your company rich?" asked tienne.

The old man shrugged his shoulders, and then let them fall as if
overwhelmed beneath an avalanche of gold.

"Ah, yes! Ah, yes! Not perhaps so rich as its neighbour, the Anzin
Company. But millions and millions all the same. They can't count it.
Nineteen pits, thirteen at work, the Voreux, the Victoire, Crvecoeur,
Mirou, St. Thomas, Madeleine, Feutry-Cantel, and still more, and six
for pumping or ventilation, like Rquillart. Ten thousand workers,
concessions reaching over sixty-seven communes, an output of five
thousand tons a day, a railway joining all the pits, and workshops, and
factories! Ah, yes! ah, yes! there's money there!"

The rolling of trams on the stages made the big yellow horse prick his
ears. The cage was evidently repaired below, and the landers had got to
work again. While he was harnessing his beast to re-descend, the carman
added gently, addressing himself to the horse:

"Won't do to chatter, lazy good-for-nothing! If Monsieur Hennebeau knew
how you waste your time!"

tienne looked thoughtfully into the night. He asked:

"Then Monsieur Hennebeau owns the mine?"

"No," explained the old man, "Monsieur Hennebeau is only the general
manager; he is paid just the same as us."

With a gesture the young man pointed into the darkness.

"Who does it all belong to, then?"

But Bonnemort was for a moment so suffocated by a new and violent spasm
that he could not get his breath. Then, when he had expectorated and
wiped the black froth from his lips, he replied in the rising wind:

"Eh? all that belong to? Nobody knows. To people."

And with his hand he pointed in the darkness to a vague spot, an
unknown and remote place, inhabited by those people for whom the Maheus
had been hammering at the seam for more than a century. His voice
assumed a tone of religious awe; it was as if he were speaking of an
inaccessible tabernacle containing a sated and crouching god to whom
they had given all their flesh and whom they had never seen.

"At all events, if one can get enough bread to eat," repeated tienne,
for the third time, without any apparent transition.

"Indeed, yes; if we could always get bread, it would be too good."

The horse had started; the carman, in his turn, disappeared, with the
trailing step of an invalid. Near the tipping-cradle the workman had
not stirred, gathered up in a ball, burying his chin between his knees,
with his great dim eyes fixed on emptiness.

When he had picked up his bundle, tienne still remained at the same
spot. He felt the gusts freezing his back, while his chest was burning
before the large fire. Perhaps, all the same, it would be as well
to inquire at the pit, the old man might not know. Then he resigned
himself; he would accept any work. Where should he go, and what was to
become of him in this country famished for lack of work? Must he leave
his carcass behind a wall, like a strayed dog? But one doubt troubled
him, a fear of the Voreux in the middle of this flat plain, drowned in
so thick a night. At every gust the wind seemed to rise as if it blew
from an ever-broadening horizon. No dawn whitened the dead sky. The
blast furnaces alone flamed, and the coke ovens, making the darkness
redder without illuminating the unknown. And the Voreux, at the bottom
of its hole, with its posture as of an evil beast, continued to crunch,
breathing with a heavier and slower respiration, troubled by its
painful digestion of human flesh.




CHAPTER II


In the middle of the fields of wheat and beetroot, the
Deux-Cent-Quarante settlement slept beneath the black night. One could
vaguely distinguish four immense blocks of small houses, back to back,
barracks or hospital blocks, geometric and parallel, separated by three
large avenues which were divided into gardens of equal size. And over
the desert plain one heard only the moan of squalls through the broken
trellises of the enclosures.

In the Maheus' house, No. 16 in the second block, nothing was stirring.
The single room that occupied the first floor was drowned in a thick
darkness which seemed to overwhelm with its weight the sleep of the
beings whom one felt to be there in a mass, with open mouths, overcome
by weariness. In spite of the keen cold outside, there was a living
heat in the heavy air, that hot stuffiness of even the best kept
bedrooms, the smell of human cattle.

Four o'clock had struck from the clock in the room on the ground floor,
but nothing yet stirred; one heard the piping of slender respirations,
accompanied by two series of sonorous snores. And suddenly Catherine
got up. In her weariness she had, as usual, counted the four strokes
through the floor without the strength to arouse herself completely.
Then, throwing her legs from under the bedclothes, she felt about, at
last struck a match and lighted the candle. But she remained seated,
her head so heavy that it fell back between her shoulders, seeking to
return to the bolster.

Now the candle lighted up the room, a square room with two windows,
and filled with three beds. There could be seen a cupboard, a table,
and two old walnut chairs, whose smoky tone made hard, dark patches
against the walls, which were painted a light yellow. And nothing else,
only clothes hung to nails, a jug placed on the floor, and a red pan
which served as a basin. In the bed on the left, Zacharie, the eldest,
a youth of one-and-twenty, was asleep with his brother Jeanlin, who
had completed his eleventh year; in the right-hand bed two urchins,
Lnore and Henri, the first six years old, the second four, slept in
each other's arms, while Catherine shared the third bed with her sister
Alzire, so small for her nine years that Catherine would not have felt
her near her if it were not for the little invalid's humpback, which
pressed into her side. The glass door was open; one could perceive the
lobby of a landing, a sort of recess in which the father and the mother
occupied a fourth bed, against which they had been obliged to install
the cradle of the latest comer, Estelle, aged scarcely three months.

However, Catherine made a desperate effort. She stretched herself,
she fidgeted her two hands in the red hair which covered her forehead
and neck. Slender for her fifteen years, all that showed of her limbs
outside the narrow sheath of her chemise were her bluish feet, as it
were tattooed with coal, and her slight arms, the milky whiteness of
which contrasted with the sallow tint of her face, already spoilt by
constant washing with black soap. A final yawn opened her rather large
mouth with splendid teeth against the chlorotic pallor of her gums;
while her grey eyes were crying in her fight with sleep, with a look of
painful distress and weariness which seemed to spread over the whole of
her naked body.

But a growl came from the landing, and Maheu's thick voice stammered;

"Devil take it! It's time. Is it you lighting up, Catherine?"

"Yes, father; it has just struck downstairs."

"Quick then, lazy. If you had danced less on Sunday you would have woke
us earlier. A fine lazy life!"

And he went on grumbling, but sleep returned to him also. His
reproaches became confused, and were extinguished in fresh snoring.

The young girl, in her chemise, with her naked feet on the floor, moved
about in the room. As she passed by the bed of Henri and Lnore, she
replaced the coverlet which had slipped down. They did not wake, lost
in the strong sleep of childhood. Alzire, with open eyes, had turned to
take the warm place of her big sister without speaking.

"I say, now, Zacharie--and you, Jeanlin; I say, now!" repeated
Catherine, standing before her two brothers, who were still wallowing
with their noses in the bolster.

She had to seize the elder by the shoulder and shake him; then, while
he was muttering abuse, it came into her head to uncover them by
snatching away the sheet. That seemed funny to her, and she began to
laugh when she saw the two boys struggling with naked legs.

"Stupid, leave me alone," growled Zacharie in ill-temper, sitting up.
"I don't like tricks. Good Lord! Say it's time to get up?"

He was lean and ill-made, with a long face and a chin which showed
signs of a sprouting beard, yellow hair, and the anaemic pallor which
belonged to his whole family.

His shirt had rolled up to his belly, and he lowered it, not from
modesty but because he was not warm.

"It has struck downstairs," repeated Catherine; "come! up! father's
angry."

Jeanlin, who had rolled himself up, closed his eyes, saying: "Go and
hang yourself; I'm going to sleep."

She laughed again, the laugh of a good-natured girl. He was so small,
his limbs so thin, with enormous joints, enlarged by scrofula, that she
took him up in her arms. But he kicked about, his apish face, pale and
wrinkled, with its green eyes and great ears, grew pale with the rage
of weakness. He said nothing, he bit her right breast.

"Beastly fellow!" she murmured, keeping back a cry and putting him on
the floor.

Alzire was silent, with the sheet tucked under her chin, but she had
not gone to sleep again. With her intelligent invalid's eyes she
followed her sister and her two brothers, who were now dressing.
Another quarrel broke out around the pan, the boys hustled the young
girl because she was so long washing herself. Shirts flew about: and,
while still half-asleep, they eased themselves without shame, with
the tranquil satisfaction of a litter of puppies that have grown up
together. Catherine was ready first. She put on her miner's breeches,
then her canvas jacket, and fastened the blue cap on her knotted hair;
in these clean Monday clothes she had the appearance of a little man;
nothing remained to indicate her sex except the slight roll of her hips.

"When the old man comes back," said Zacharie, mischievously, "he'll
like to find the bed unmade. You know I shall tell him it's you."

The old man was the grandfather, Bonnemort, who, as he worked during
the night, slept by day, so that the bed was never cold; there was
always someone snoring there. Without replying, Catherine set herself
to arrange the bed-clothes and tuck them in. But during the last
moments sounds had been heard behind the wall in the next house. These
brick buildings, economically put up by the Company, were so thin that
the least breath could be heard through them. The inmates lived there,
elbow to elbow, from one end to the other; and no fact of family life
remained hidden, even from the youngsters. A heavy step had tramped up
the staircase; then there was a kind of soft fall, followed by a sigh
of satisfaction.

"Good!" said Catherine. "Levaque has gone down, and here is Bouteloup
come to join the Levaque woman."

Jeanlin grinned; even Alzire's eyes shone. Every morning they made fun
of the household of three next door, a pikeman who lodged a worker in
the cutting, an arrangement which gave the woman two men, one by night,
the other by day.

"Philomne is coughing," began Catherine again, after listening.

She was speaking of the eldest Levaque, a big girl of nineteen, and
the mistress of Zacharie, by whom she had already had two children;
her chest was so delicate that she was only a sifter at the pit, never
having been able to work below.

"Pooh! Philomne!" replied Zacharie, "she cares a lot, she's asleep.
It's hoggish to sleep till six."

He was putting on his breeches when an idea occurred to him, and he
opened the window. Outside in the darkness the settlement was awaking,
lights were dawning one by one between the laths of the shutters. And
there was another dispute: he leant out to watch if he could not see,
coming out of Pierron's opposite, the captain of the Voreux, who was
accused of sleeping with the Pierron woman, while his sister called to
him that since the day before the husband had taken day duty at the
pit-eye, and that certainly Dansaert could not have slept there that
night. Whilst the air entered in icy whiffs, both of them, becoming
angry, maintained the truth of their own information, until cries and
tears broke out. It was Estelle, in her cradle, vexed by the cold.

Maheu woke up suddenly. What had he got in his bones, then? Here
he was going to sleep again like a good-for-nothing. And he swore
so vigorously that the children became still. Zacharie and Jeanlin
finished washing with slow weariness. Alzire, with her large, open
eyes, continually stared. The two youngsters, Lnore and Henri, in each
other's arms, had not stirred, breathing in the same quiet way in spite
of the noise.

"Catherine, give me the candle," called out Maheu.

She finished buttoning her jacket, and carried the candle into the
closet, leaving her brothers to look for their clothes by what light
came through the door. Her father jumped out of bed. She did not stop,
but went downstairs in her coarse woollen stockings, feeling her way,
and lighted another candle in the parlour, to prepare the coffee. All
the sabots of the family were beneath the sideboard.

"Will you be still, vermin?" began Maheu, again, exasperated by
Estelle's cries which still went on.

He was short, like old Bonnemort, and resembled him, with his strong
head, his flat, livid face, beneath yellow hair cut very short. The
child screamed more than ever, frightened by those great knotted arms
which were held above her.

"Leave her alone; you know that she won't be still," said his wife,
stretching herself in the middle of the bed.

She also had just awakened and was complaining how disgusting it was
never to be able to finish the night. Could they not go away quietly?
Buried in the clothes she only showed her long face with large features
of a heavy beauty, already disfigured at thirty-nine by her life of
wretchedness and the seven children she had borne. With her eyes on
the ceiling she spoke slowly, while her man dressed himself. They
both ceased to hear the little one, who was strangling herself with
screaming.

"Eh? You know I haven't a penny and this is only Monday: still six days
before the fortnight's out. This can't go on. You, all of you, only
bring in nine francs. How do you expect me to go on? We are ten in the
house."

"Oh! nine francs!" exclaimed Maheu. "I and Zacharie three: that makes
six, Catherine and the father, two: that makes four: four and six, ten,
and Jeanlin one, that makes eleven."

"Yes, eleven, but there are Sundays and the off-days. Never more than
nine, you know."

He did not reply, being occupied in looking on the ground for his
leather belt. Then he said, on getting up:

"Mustn't complain. I am sound all the same. There's more than one at
forty-two who are put to the patching."

"Maybe, old man, but that does not give us bread. Where am I to get it
from, eh? Have you got nothing?"

"I've got two coppers."

"Keep them for a half-pint. Good Lord! where am I to get it from? Six
days! it will never end. We owe sixty francs to Maigrat, who turned me
out of doors day before yesterday. That won't prevent me from going to
see him again. But if he goes on refusing----"

And Maheude continued in her melancholy voice, without moving her head,
only closing her eyes now and then beneath the dim light of the candle.
She said the cupboard was empty, the little ones asking for bread and
butter, even the coffee was done, and the water caused colic, and
the long days passed in deceiving hunger with boiled cabbage leaves.
Little by little she had been obliged to raise her voice, for Estelle's
screams drowned her words. These cries became unbearable. Maheu seemed
all at once to hear them, and, in a fury, snatched the little one up
from the cradle and threw it on the mother's bed, stammering with rage:

"Here, take her; I'll do for her! Damn the child! It wants for nothing:
it sucks, and it complains louder than all the rest!"

Estelle began, in fact, to suck. Hidden beneath the clothes and soothed
by the warmth of the bed, her cries subsided into the greedy little
sound of her lips.

"Haven't the Piolaine people told you to go and see them?" asked the
father, after a period of silence.

The mother bit her lip with an air of discouraged doubt.

"Yes, they met me; they were carrying clothes for poor children. Yes,
I'll take Lnore and Henri to them this morning. If they only give me a
few pence!"

There was silence again.

Maheu was ready. He remained a moment motionless, then added, in his
hollow voice:

"What is it that you want? Let things be, and see about the soup. It's
no good talking, better be at work down below."

"True enough," replied Maheude. "Blow out the candle: I don't need to
see the colour of my thoughts."

He blew out the candle. Zacharie and Jeanlin were already going down;
he followed them, and the wooden staircase creaked beneath their heavy
feet, clad in wool. Behind them the closet and the room were again
dark. The children slept; even Alzire's eyelids were closed; but the
mother now remained with her eyes open in the darkness, while, pulling
at her breast, the pendent breast of an exhausted woman, Estelle was
purring like a kitten.

Down below, Catherine had at first occupied herself with the fire,
which was burning in the iron grate, flanked by two ovens. The Company
distributed every month, to each family, eight hectolitres of a hard
slaty coal, gathered in the passages. It burnt slowly, and the young
girl, who piled up the fire every night, only had to stir it in the
morning, adding a few fragments of soft coal, carefully picked out.
Then, after having placed a kettle on the grate, she sat down before
the sideboard.

It was a fairly large room, occupying all the ground floor, painted an
apple green, and of Flemish cleanliness, with its flags well washed and
covered with white sand. Besides the sideboard of varnished deal the
furniture consisted of a table and chairs of the same wood. Stuck on to
the walls were some violently-coloured prints, portraits of the Emperor
and the Empress, given by the Company, of soldiers and of saints
speckled with gold, contrasting crudely with the simple nudity of the
room; and there was no other ornament except a box of rose-coloured
pasteboard on the sideboard, and the clock with its daubed face and
loud tick-tack, which seemed to fill the emptiness of the place. Near
the staircase door another door led to the cellar. In spite of the
cleanliness, an odour of cooked onion, shut up since the night before,
poisoned the hot, heavy air, always laden with an acrid flavour of coal.

Catherine, in front of the sideboard, was reflecting. There only
remained the end of a loaf, cheese in fair abundance, but hardly a
morsel of butter; and she had to provide bread and butter for four. At
last she decided, cut the slices, took one and covered it with cheese,
spread another with butter, and stuck them together; that was the
"brick," the bread-and-butter sandwich taken to the pit every morning.
The four bricks were soon on the table, in a row, cut with severe
justice, from the big one for the father down to the little one for
Jeanlin.

Catherine, who appeared absorbed in her household duties, must,
however, have been thinking of the stories told by Zacharie about the
head captain and the Pierron woman, for she half opened the front door
and glanced outside. The wind was still whistling. There were numerous
spots of light on the low fronts of the settlement, from which arose a
vague tremor of awakening. Already doors were being closed, and black
files of workers passed into the night. It was stupid of her to get
cold, since the porter at the pit-eye was certainly asleep, waiting
to take his duties at six. Yet she remained and looked at the house
on the other side of the gardens. The door opened, and her curiosity
was aroused. But it could only be one of the little Pierrons, Lydie,
setting out for the pit.

The hissing sound of steam made her turn. She shut the door, and
hastened back; the water was boiling over, and putting out the fire.
There was no more coffee. She had to be content to add the water to
last night's dregs; then she sugared the coffee-pot with brown sugar.
At that moment her father and two brothers came downstairs.

"Faith!" exclaimed Zacharie, when he had put his nose into his bowl,
"here's something that won't get into our heads."

Maheu shrugged his shoulders with an air of resignation.

"Bah! It's hot! It's good all the same."

Jeanlin had gathered up the fragments of bread and made a sop of them.
After having drunk, Catherine finished by emptying the coffee-pot into
the tin-jacks. All four, standing up in the smoky light of the candle,
swallowed their meals hastily.

"Are we at the end?" said the father; "one would say we were people of
property."

But a voice came from the staircase, of which they had left the door
open. It was Maheude, who called out:

"Take all the bread: I have some vermicelli for the children."

"Yes, yes," replied Catherine.

She had piled up the fire, wedging the pot that held the remains of the
soup into a corner of the grate, so that the grandfather might find
it warm when he came in at six. Each took his sabots from under the
sideboard, passed the strings of his tin over his shoulder and placed
his brick at his back, between shirt and jacket. And they went out, the
men first, the girl, who came last, blowing out the candle and turning
the key. The house became dark again.

"Ah! we're off together," said a man who was closing the door of the
next house.

It was Levaque, with his son Bbert, an urchin of twelve, a great
friend of Jeanlin's. Catherine, in surprise, stifled a laugh in
Zacharie's ear:

"Why! Bouteloup didn't even wait until the husband had gone!"

Now the lights in the settlement were extinguished, and the last door
banged. All again fell asleep; the women and the little ones resuming
their slumber in the midst of wider beds. And from the extinguished
village to the roaring Voreux a slow filing of shadows took place
beneath the squalls, the departure of the colliers to their work,
bending their shoulders and incommoded by their arms, crossed on their
breasts, while the brick behind formed a hump on each back. Clothed
in their thin jackets they shivered with cold, but without hastening,
straggling along the road with the tramp of a flock.




CHAPTER III


tienne had at last descended from the platform and entered the
Voreux; he spoke to men whom he met, asking if there was work to be
had, but all shook their heads, telling him to wait for the captain.
They left him free to roam through the ill-lighted buildings, full of
black holes, confusing with their complicated stories and rooms. After
having mounted a dark and half-destroyed staircase, he found himself
on a shaky foot-bridge; then he crossed the screening-shed, which
was plunged in such profound darkness that he walked with his hands
before him for protection. Suddenly two enormous yellow eyes pierced
the darkness in front of him. He was beneath the pit-frame in the
receiving-room, at the very mouth of the shaft.

A captain, Father Richomme, a big man with the face of a good-natured
gendarme, and with a straight grey moustache, was at that moment going
towards the receiver's office.

"Do they want a hand here for any kind of work?" asked tienne again.

Richomme was about to say no, but he changed his mind and replied like
the others, as he went away:

"Wait for Monsieur Dansaert, the head captain."

Four lanterns were placed there, and the reflectors which threw all
the light on to the shaft vividly illuminated the iron rail, the
levers of the signals and bars, the joists of the guides along which
slid the two cages. The rest of the vast room, like the nave of a
church, was obscure, and peopled by great floating shadows. Only the
lamp-cabin shone at the far end, while in the receiver's office a small
lamp looked like a fading star. Work was about to be resumed, and on
the iron pavement there was a continual thunder, trams of coal being
wheeled without ceasing, while the landers, with their long, bent
backs, could be distinguished amid the movement of all these black and
noisy things, in perpetual agitation.

For a moment tienne stood motionless, deafened and blinded. He felt
frozen by the currents of air which entered from every side. Then he
moved on a few paces, attracted by the winding engine, of which he
could now see the glistening steel and copper. It was twenty-five
metres beyond the shaft, in a loftier chamber, and placed so solidly on
its brick foundation that though it worked at full speed, with all its
four hundred horse power, the movement of its enormous crank, emerging
and plunging with oily softness, imparted no quiver to the walls.
The engine-man, standing at his post, listened to the ringing of the
signals, and his eye never moved from the indicator where the shaft
was figured, with its different levels, by a vertical groove traversed
by shot hanging to strings, which represented the cages; and at each
departure, when the machine was put in motion, the drums--two immense
wheels, five metres in radius, by means of which the two steel cables
were rolled and unrolled--turned with such rapidity that they became
like grey powder.

"Look out, there!" cried three landers, who were dragging an immense
ladder.

tienne just escaped being crushed; his eyes were soon more at home,
and he watched the cables moving in the air, more than thirty metres
of steel ribbon, which flew up into the pit-frame where they passed
over pulleys to descend perpendicularly into the shaft, where they
were attached to the cages. An iron frame, like the high scaffolding
of a belfry, supported the pulleys. It was like the gliding of a bird,
noiseless, without a jar, this rapid flight, the continual come and
go of a thread of enormous weight, capable of lifting twelve thousand
kilograms at the rate of ten metres a second.

"Attention there, for God's sake!" cried again the landers, pushing
the ladder to the other side in order to climb to the left-hand rowel.
Slowly tienne returned to the receiving-room. This giant flight over
his head took away his breath. Shivering in the currents of air, he
watched the movement of the cages, his ears deafened by the rumblings
of the trams. Near the shaft the signal was working, a heavy-levered
hammer drawn by a cord from below and allowed to strike against a
block. One blow to stop, two to go down, three to go up; it was
unceasing, like blows of a club dominating the tumult, accompanied by
the clear sound of the bell; while the lander, directing the work,
increased the noise still more by shouting orders to the engine-man
through a trumpet. The cages in the middle of the clear space appeared
and disappeared, were filled and emptied, without tienne being at all
able to understand the complicated proceeding.

He only understood one thing well: the shaft swallowed men by mouthfuls
of twenty or thirty, and with so easy a gulp that it seemed to feel
nothing go down. Since four o'clock the descent of the workmen had
been going on. They came to the shed with naked feet and their lamps
in their hands, waiting in little groups until a sufficient number had
arrived. Without a sound, with the soft bound of a nocturnal beast,
the iron cage arose from the night, wedged itself on the bolts with
its four decks, each containing two trams full of coal. Landers on
different platforms took out the trams and replaced them by others,
either empty or already laden with trimmed wooden props; and it was
into the empty trams that the workmen crowded, five at a time, up to
forty. When they filled all the compartments, an order came from the
trumpet--a hollow indistinct roar--while the signal cord was pulled
four times from below, "ringing meat," to give warning of this burden
of human flesh. Then, after a slight leap, the cage plunged silently,
falling like a stone, only leaving behind it the vibrating flight of a
cable.

"Is it deep?" asked tienne of a miner, who waited near him with a
sleepy air.

"Five hundred and fifty-four metres," replied the man. "But there are
four levels, the first at three hundred and twenty." Both were silent,
with their eyes on the returning cable. tienne said again:

"And if it breaks?"

"Ah! if it breaks----"

The miner ended with a gesture. His turn had arrived; the cage had
reappeared with its easy, unfatigued movement. He squatted in it with
some comrades; it plunged down, then flew up again in less then four
minutes to swallow down another load of men. For half an hour the shaft
went on devouring in this fashion, with more or less greedy gulps,
according to the depth of the level to which the men went down, but
without stopping, always hungry, with its giant intestines capable
of digesting a nation. It went on filling and still filling, and the
darkness remained dead. The cage mounted from the void with the same
voracious silence.

tienne was at last seized again by the same depression which he had
experienced on the pit bank. What was the good of persisting? This
head captain would send him off like the others. A vague fear suddenly
decided him: he went away, only stopping before the building of the
engine room. The wide-open door showed seven boilers with two furnaces.
In the midst of the white steam and the whistling of the escapes a
stoker was occupied in piling up one of the furnaces, the heat of
which could be felt as far as the threshold; and the young man was
approaching, glad of the warmth, when he met a new band of colliers who
had just arrived at the pit. It was the Maheu and Levaque set. When he
saw Catherine at the head, with her gentle boyish air, a superstitious
idea caused him to risk another question.

"I say there, mate! do they want a hand here for any kind of work?"

She looked at him surprised, rather frightened at this sudden voice
coming out of the shadow. But Maheu, behind her, had heard and replied,
talking with tienne for a moment. No, no one was wanted. This poor
devil of a man who had lost his way here interested him. When he left
him he said to the others:

"Eh! one might easily be like that. Mustn't complain: every one hasn't
the chance to work himself to death."

The band entered and went straight to the shed, a vast hall roughly
boarded and surrounded by cupboards shut by padlocks. In the centre an
iron fireplace, a sort of closed stove without a door, glowed red and
was so stuffed with burning coal that fragments flew out and rolled
on to the trodden soil. The hall was only lighted by this stove,
from which sanguine reflections danced along the greasy woodwork up
to the ceiling, stained with black dust. As the Maheus went into the
heat there was a sound of laughter. Some thirty workmen were standing
upright with their backs to the fire, roasting themselves with an air
of enjoyment. Before going down, they all came here to get a little
warmth in their skins, so that they could face the dampness of the
pit. But this morning there was much amusement: they were joking
Mouquette, a putter girl of eighteen, whose enormous breasts and
flanks were bursting through her old jacket and breeches. She lived
at Rquillart with her father old Mouque, a groom, and Mouquet, her
brother, a lander; but their hours of work were not the same; she went
to the pit by herself, and in the middle of the wheatfields in summer,
or against a wall in winter, she took her pleasure with her lover of
the week. All in the mine had their turn; it was a perpetual round of
comrades without further consequences. One day, when reproached about
a Marchiennes nail-maker, she was furiously angry, exclaiming that she
respected herself far too much, that she would cut her arm off if any
one could boast that he had seen her with any one but a collier.

"It isn't that big Chaval now?" said a miner grinning; "did that
little fellow have you? he must have needed a ladder. I saw you behind
Rquillart, a token that he got up on a milestone."

"Well," replied Mouquette, in a good humour, "what's that to do with
you? You were not asked to push."

And this gross good-natured joke increased the laughter of the men, who
expanded their shoulders, half cooked by the stove, while she herself,
shaken by laughter, was displaying in the midst of them the indecency
of her costume, embarrassingly comical, with her masses of flesh
exaggerated almost to disease.

But the gaiety ceased; Mouquette told Maheu that Fleurance, big
Fleurance, would never come again; she had been found the night before
stiff in her bed; some said it was her heart, others that it was a pint
of gin she had drunk too quickly. And Maheu was in despair; another
piece of ill-luck; one of the best of his putters gone without any
chance of replacing her at once. He was working in a set; there were
four pikemen associated in his cutting, himself, Zacharie, Levaque, and
Chaval. If they had Catherine alone to wheel, the work would suffer.

Suddenly he called out:

"I have it! there was that man looking for work!"

At that moment Dansaert passed before the shed. Maheu told him the
story, and asked for his authority to engage the man; he emphasized the
desire of the Company to substitute men for women, as at Anzin. The
head captain smiled at first; for the scheme of excluding women from
the pit was not usually well received by the miners, who were troubled
about placing their daughters, and not much affected by questions of
morality and health. But after some hesitation he gave his permission,
reserving its ratification for Monsieur Ngrel, the engineer.

"All very well!" exclaimed Zacharie; "the man must be away by this
time."

"No," said Catherine. "I saw him stop at the boilers."

"After him, then, lazy," cried Maheu.

The young girl ran forward; while a crowd of miners proceeded to the
shaft, yielding the fire to others.

Jeanlin, without waiting for his father, went also to take his lamp,
together with Bbert, a big, stupid boy, and Lydie, a small child of
ten. Mouquette, who was in front of them, called out in the black
passage they were dirty brats, and threatened to box their ears if they
pinched her.

tienne was, in fact, in the boiler building, talking with a stoker,
who was charging the furnaces with coal. He felt very cold at the
thought of the night into which he must return. But he was deciding to
set out, when he felt a hand placed on his shoulder.

"Come," said Catherine; "there's something for you."

At first he could not understand. Then he felt a spasm of joy, and
vigorously squeezed the young girl's hands.

"Thanks, mate. Ah! you're a good chap, you are!"

She began to laugh, looking at him in the red light of the furnaces,
which lit them up. It amused her that he should take her for a boy,
still slender, with her knot of hair hidden beneath the cap. He also
was laughing, with satisfaction, and they remained, for a moment, both
laughing in each other's faces with radiant cheeks.

Maheu, squatting down before his box in the shed, was taking off
his sabots and his coarse woollen stockings. When tienne arrived
everything was settled in three or four words: thirty sous a day,
hard work, but work that he would easily learn. The pikeman advised
him to keep his shoes, and lent him an old cap, a leather hat for the
protection of his skull, a precaution which the father and his children
disdained. The tools were taken out of the chest, where also was found
Fleurance's shovel. Then, when Maheu had shut up their sabots, their
stockings, as well as tienne's bundle, he suddenly became impatient.

"What is that lazy Chaval up to? Another girl given a tumble on a pile
of stones? We are half an hour late to-day."

Zacharie and Levaque were quietly roasting their shoulders. The former
said at last:

"Is it Chaval you're waiting for? He came before us, and went down at
once."

"What! you knew that, and said nothing? Come, come, look sharp!"

Catherine, who was warming her hands, had to follow the band. tienne
allowed her to pass, and went behind her. Again he journeyed through
a maze of staircases and obscure corridors in which their naked feet
produced the soft sound of old slippers. But the lamp-cabin was
glittering--a glass house, full of hooks in rows, holding hundreds of
Davy lamps, examined and washed the night before, and lighted like
candles in a mortuary chapel. At the barrier each workman took his own,
stamped with his number; then he examined it and shut it himself, while
the marker, seated at a table, inscribed on the registers the hour of
descent. Maheu had to intervene to obtain a lamp for his new putter,
and there was still another precaution: the workers defiled before an
examiner, who assured himself that all the lamps were properly closed.

"Golly! It's not warm here," murmured Catherine, shivering.

tienne contented himself with nodding his head. He was in front of
the shaft, in the midst of a vast hall swept by currents of air.
He certainly considered himself brave, but he felt a disagreeable
emotion at his chest amid this thunder of trams, the hollow blows of
the signals, the stifled howling of the trumpet, the continual flight
of those cables, unrolled and rolled at full speed by the drums of
the engine. The cages rose and sank with the gliding movement of a
nocturnal beast, always engulfing men, whom the throat of the hole
seemed to drink. It was his turn now. He felt very cold, and preserved
a nervous silence which made Zacharie and Levaque grin; for both of
them disapproved of the hiring of this unknown man, especially Levaque,
who was offended that he had not been consulted. So Catherine was glad
to hear her father explain things to the young man.

"Look! above the cage there is a parachute with iron grapnels to catch
into the guides in case of breakage. Does it work? Oh, not always. Yes,
the shaft is divided into three compartments, closed by planking from
top to bottom; in the middle the cages, on the left the passage for the
ladders----"

But he interrupted himself to grumble, though taking care not to raise
his voice much.

"What are we stuck here for, blast it? What right have they to freeze
us in this way?"

The captain, Richomme, who was going down himself, with his naked lamp
fixed by a nail into the leather of his cap, heard him.

"Careful! Look out for ears," he murmured paternally, as an old miner
with a affectionate feeling for comrades. "Workmen must do what they
can. Hold on! here we are; get in with your fellows."

The cage, provided with iron bands and a small-meshed lattice work,
was in fact awaiting them on the bars. Maheu, Zacharie, and Catherine
slid into a tram below, and as all five had to enter, tienne in
his turn went in, but the good places were taken; he had to squeeze
himself near the young girl, whose elbow pressed into his belly. His
lamp embarrassed him; they advised him to fasten it to the button-hole
of his jacket. Not hearing, he awkwardly kept it in his hand. The
embarkation continued, above and below, a confused packing of cattle.
They did not, however, set out. What, then, was happening? It seemed
to him that his impatience lasted for many minutes. At last he felt a
shock, and the light grew dim, everything around him seemed to fly,
while he experienced the dizzy anxiety of a fall contracting his
bowels. This lasted as long as he could see light, through the two
reception stories, in the midst of the whirling by of the scaffolding.
Then, having fallen into the blackness of the pit, he became stunned,
no longer having any clear perception of his sensations.

"Now we are off," said Maheu quietly.

They were all at their ease. He asked himself at times if he was going
up or down. Now and then, when the cage went straight without touching
the guides, there seemed to be no motion, but rough shocks were
afterwards produced, a sort of dancing amid the joists, which made him
fear a catastrophe. For the rest he could not distinguish the walls of
the shaft behind the lattice work, to which he pressed his face. The
lamps feebly lighted the mass of bodies at his feet. Only the captain's
naked light, in the neighbouring tram, shone like a lighthouse.

"This is four metres in diameter," continued Maheu, to instruct him.
"The tubbing wants doing over again, for the water comes in everywhere.
Stop! we are reaching the bottom: do you hear?"

tienne was, in fact, now asking himself the meaning of this noise of
falling rain. A few large drops had at first sounded on the roof of
the cage, like the beginning of a shower, and now the rain increased,
streaming down, becoming at last a deluge. The roof must be full of
holes, for a thread of water was flowing on to his shoulder and wetting
him to the skin. The cold became icy and they were buried in black
humidity, when they passed through a sudden flash of light, the vision
of a cavern in which men were moving. But already they had fallen back
into darkness.

Maheu said:

"That is the first main level. We are at three hundred and twenty
metres. See the speed."

Raising his lamp he lighted up a joist of the guides which fled by like
a rail beneath a train going at full speed; and beyond, as before,
nothing could be seen. They passed three other levels in flashes of
light. The deafening rain continued to strike through the darkness.

"How deep it is!" murmured tienne.

This fall seemed to last for hours. He was suffering for the cramped
position he had taken, not daring to move, and especially tortured by
Catherine's elbow. She did not speak a word; he only felt her against
him and it warmed him. When the cage at last stopped at the bottom, at
five hundred and fifty-four metres, he was astonished to learn that
the descent had lasted exactly one minute. But the noise of the bolts
fixing themselves, the sensation of solidity beneath, suddenly cheered
him; and he was joking when he said to Catherine:

"What have you got under your skin to be so warm? I've got your elbow
in my belly, sure enough."

Then she also burst out laughing. Stupid of him, still to take her for
a boy! Were his eyes out?

"It's in your eye that you've got my elbow!" she replied, in the midst
of a storm of laughter which the astonished young man could not account
for.

The cage voided its burden of workers, who crossed the pit-eye hall, a
chamber cut in the rock, vaulted with masonry, and lighted up by three
large lamps. Over the iron flooring the porters were violently rolling
laden trams. A cavernous odour exhaled from the walls, a freshness of
saltpetre in which mingled hot breaths from the neighbouring stable.
The openings of four galleries yawned here.

"This way," said Maheu to tienne. "You're not there yet. It is still
two kilometres."

The workmen separated, and were lost in groups in the depths of these
black holes. Some fifteen went off into that on the left, and tienne
walked last, behind Maheu, who was preceded by Catherine, Zacharie,
and Levaque. It was a large gallery for wagons, through a bed of solid
rock, which had only needed walling here and there. In single file they
still went on without a word, by the tiny flame of the lamps. The young
man stumbled at every step, and entangled his feet in the rails. For a
moment a hollow sound disturbed him, the sound of a distant storm, the
violence of which seemed to increase and to come from the bowels of the
earth. Was it the thunder of a landslip bringing on to their heads the
enormous mass which separated them from the light? A gleam pierced the
night, he felt the rock tremble, and when he had placed himself close
to the wall, like his comrades, he saw a large white horse close to his
face, harnessed to a train of wagons. On the first, and holding the
reins, was seated Bbert, while Jeanlin, with his hands leaning on the
edge of the last, was running barefooted behind.

They again began their walk. Farther on they reached crossways, where
two new galleries opened, and the band divided again, the workers
gradually entering all the stalls of the mine.

Now the wagon-gallery was constructed of wood; props of timber
supported the roof, and made for the crumbly rock a screen of
scaffolding, behind which one could see the plates of schist glimmering
with mica, and the coarse masses of dull, rough sandstone. Trains of
tubs, full or empty, continually passed, crossing each other with
their thunder, borne into the shadow by vague beasts trotting by like
phantoms. On the double way of a shunting line a long, black serpent
slept, a train at standstill, with a snorting horse, whose crupper
looked like a block fallen from the roof. Doors for ventilation were
slowly opening and shutting. And as they advanced the gallery became
more narrow and lower, and the roof irregular, forcing them to bend
their backs constantly.

tienne struck his head hard; without his leather cap he would have
broken his skull. However, he attentively followed the slightest
gestures of Maheu, whose sombre profile was seen against the glimmer of
the lamps. None of the workmen knocked themselves; they evidently knew
each boss, each knot of wood or swelling in the rock. The young man
also suffered from the slippery soil, which became damper and damper.
At times he went through actual puddles, only revealed by the muddy
splash of his feet. But what especially astonished him were the sudden
changes of temperature. At the bottom of the shaft it was very chilly,
and in the wagon-gallery, through which all the air of the mine passed,
an icy breeze was blowing, with the violence of a tempest, between the
narrow walls. Afterwards, as they penetrated more deeply along other
passages which only received a meagre share of air, the wind fell and
the heat increased, a suffocating heat as heavy as lead.

Maheu had not again opened his mouth. He turned down another gallery to
the right, simply saying to tienne, without looking round:

"The Guillaume seam."

It was the seam which contained their cutting. At the first step,
tienne hurt his head and elbows. The sloping roof descended so low
that, for twenty or thirty metres at a time, he had to walk bent
double. The water came up to his ankles. After two hundred metres of
this, he saw Levaque, Zacharie, and Catherine disappear, as though they
had flown through a narrow fissure which was open in front of him.

"We must climb," said Maheu. "Fasten your lamp to a button-hole and
hang on to the wood." He himself disappeared, and tienne had to follow
him. This chimney-passage left in the seam was reserved for miners, and
led to all the secondary passages. It was about the thickness of the
coal-bed, hardly sixty centimetres. Fortunately the young man was thin,
for, as he was still awkward, he hoisted himself up with a useless
expense of muscle, flattening his shoulders and hips, advancing by the
strength of his wrists, clinging to the planks. Fifteen metres higher
they came on the first secondary passage, but they had to continue, as
the cutting of Maheu and his mates was in the sixth passage, in hell,
as they said; every fifteen metres the passages were placed over each
other in never-ending succession through this cleft, which scraped back
and chest. tienne groaned as if the weight of the rocks had pounded
his limbs; with torn hands and bruised legs, he also suffered from
lack of air, so that he seemed to feel the blood bursting through his
skin. He vaguely saw in one passage two squatting beasts, a big one
and a little one, pushing trams: they were Lydie and Mouquette already
at work. And he had still to climb the height of two cuttings! He was
blinded by sweat, and he despaired of catching up the others, whose
agile limbs he heard brushing against the rock with a long gliding
movement.

"Cheer up! here we are!" said Catherine's voice.

He had, in fact, arrived, and another voice cried from the bottom of
the cutting:

"Well, is this the way to treat people? I have two kilometres to walk
from Montsou and I am here first." It was Chaval, a tall, lean, bony
fellow of twenty-five, with strongly marked features, who was in a
bad humour at having to wait. When he saw tienne he asked, with
contemptuous surprise:

"What's that?"

And when Maheu had told him the story he added between his teeth:

"These men are eating the bread of girls."

The two men exchanged a look, lighted up by one of those instinctive
hatreds which suddenly flame up. tienne had felt the insult without
yet understanding it. There was silence, and they got to work. At last
all the seams were gradually filled, and the cuttings were in movement
at every level and at the end of every passage. The devouring shaft
had swallowed its daily ration of men: nearly seven hundred hands, who
were now at work in this giant ant-hill, everywhere making holes in the
earth, drilling it like an old worm-eaten piece of wood. And in the
middle of the heavy silence and crushing weight of the strata one could
hear, by placing one's ear to the rock, the movement of these human
insects at work, from the flight of the cable which moved the cage up
and down, to the biting of the tools cutting out the coal at the end
of the stalls. tienne, on turning round, found himself again pressed
close to Catherine. But this time he caught a glimpse of the developing
curves of her breast: he suddenly understood the warmth which had
penetrated him.

"You are a girl, then!" he exclaimed, stupefied.

She replied in her cheerful way, without blushing:

"Of course. You've taken your time to find it out!"




CHAPTER IV


The four pikemen had spread themselves one above the other over the
whole face of the cutting. Separated by planks, hooked on to retain the
fallen coal, they each occupied about four metres of the seam, and this
seam was so thin, scarcely more than fifty centimetres thick at this
spot, that they seemed to be flattened between the roof and the wall,
dragging themselves along by their knees and elbows, and unable to turn
without crushing their shoulders. In order to attack the coal, they
had to lie on their sides with their necks twisted and arms raised,
brandishing, in a sloping direction, their short-handled picks.

Below there was, first, Zacharie; Levaque and Chaval were on the
stages above, and at the very top was Maheu. Each worked at the
slaty bed, which he dug out with blows of the pick; then he made
two vertical cuttings in the bed and detached the block by burying
an iron wedge in its upper part. The coal was rich; the block broke
and rolled in fragments along their bellies and thighs. When these
fragments, retained by the plank, had collected round them, the pikemen
disappeared, buried in the narrow cleft.

Maheu suffered most. At the top the temperature rose to thirty-five
degrees, and the air was stagnant, so that in the long run it became
lethal. In order to see, he had been obliged to fix his lamp to a
nail near his head, and this lamp, close to his skull, still further
heated his blood. But his torment was especially aggravated by the
moisture. The rock above him, a few centimetres from his face, streamed
with water, which fell in large continuous rapid drops with a sort
of obstinate rhythm, always at the same spot. It was vain for him to
twist his head or bend back his neck. They fell on his face, dropping
unceasingly. In a quarter of an hour he was soaked, and at the same
time covered with sweat, smoking as with the hot steam of a laundry.
This morning a drop beating upon his eye made him swear. He would not
leave his picking, he dealt great strokes which shook him violently
between the two rocks, like a fly caught between two leaves of a book
and in danger of being completely flattened.

Not a word was exchanged. They all hammered; one only heard these
irregular blows, which seemed veiled and remote. The sounds had a
sonorous hoarseness, without any echo in the dead air. And it seemed
that the darkness was an unknown blackness, thickened by the floating
coal dust, made heavy by the gas which weighed on the eyes. The wicks
of the lamps beneath their caps of metallic tissue only showed as
reddish points. One could distinguish nothing. The cutting opened out
above like a large chimney, flat and oblique, in which the soot of ten
years had amassed a profound night. Spectral figures were moving in it,
the gleams of light enabled one to catch a glimpse of a rounded hip, a
knotty arm, a vigorous head, besmeared as if for a crime. Sometimes,
blocks of coal shone suddenly as they became detached, illuminated by
a crystalline reflection. Then everything fell back into darkness,
pickaxes struck great hollow blows; one only heard panting chests, the
grunting of discomfort and weariness beneath the weight of the air and
the rain of the springs.

Zacharie, with arms weakened by a spree of the night before, soon
left his work on the pretence that more timbering was necessary. This
allowed him to forget himself in quiet whistling, his eyes vaguely
resting in the shade. Behind the pikemen nearly three metres of
the seam were clear, and they had not yet taken the precaution of
supporting the rock, having grown careless of danger and miserly of
their time.

"Here, you swell," cried the young man to tienne, "hand up some wood."

tienne, who was learning from Catherine how to manage his shovel, had
to raise the wood in the cutting. A small supply had remained over from
yesterday. It was usually sent down every morning ready cut to fit the
bed.

"Hurry up there, damn it!" shouted Zacharie, seeing the new putter
hoist himself up awkwardly in the midst of the coal, his arms
embarrassed by four pieces of oak.

He made a hole in the roof with his pickaxe, and then another in the
wall, and wedged in the two ends of the wood, which thus supported
the rock. In the afternoon the workers in the earth cutting took the
rubbish left at the bottom of the gallery by the pikemen, and cleared
out the exhausted section of the seam, in which they destroyed the
wood, being only careful about the lower and upper roads for the
haulage.

Maheu ceased to groan. At last he had detached his block, and he wiped
his streaming face on his sleeve. He was worried about what Zacharie
was doing behind him.

"Let it be," he said, "we will see after breakfast. Better go on
hewing, if we want to make up our share of trams."

"It's because it's sinking," replied the young man. "Look, there's a
crack. It may slip."

But the father shrugged his shoulders. Ah! nonsense! Slip! And if it
did, it would not be the first time; they would get out of it all
right. He grew angry at last, and sent his son to the front of the
cutting.

All of them, however, were now stretching themselves. Levaque, resting
on his back, was swearing as he examined his left thumb which had been
grazed by the fall of a piece of sandstone. Chaval had taken off his
shirt in a fury, and was working with bare chest and back for the sake
of coolness. They were already black with coal, soaked in a fine dust
diluted with sweat which ran down in streams and pools. Maheu first
began again to hammer, lower down, with his head level with the rock.
Now the drop struck his forehead so obstinately that he seemed to feel
it piercing a hole in the bone of his skull.

"You mustn't mind," explained Catherine to tienne, "they are always
howling."

And like a good-natured girl she went on with her lesson. Every laden
tram arrived at the top in the same condition as it left the cutting,
marked with a special metal token so that the receiver might put it to
the reckoning of the stall. It was necessary, therefore, to be very
careful to fill it, and only to take clean coal, otherwise it was
refused at the receiving office.

The young man, whose eyes were now becoming accustomed to the darkness,
looked at her, still white with her chlorotic complexion, and he could
not have told her age; he thought she must be twelve, she seemed to him
so slight. However, he felt she must be older, with her boyish freedom,
a simple audacity which confused him a little; she did not please him:
he thought her too roguish with her pale Pierrot head, framed at the
temples by the cap. But what astonished him was the strength of this
child, a nervous strength which was blended with a good deal of skill.
She filled her tram faster than he could, with quick small regular
strokes of the shovel; she afterwards pushed it to the inclined way
with a single slow push, without a hitch, easily passing under the low
rocks. He tore himself to pieces, got off the rails, and was reduced to
despair.

It was certainly not a convenient road. It was sixty metres from the
cutting to the upbrow, and the passage, which the miners in the earth
cutting had not yet enlarged, was a mere tube with a very irregular
roof swollen by innumerable bosses; at certain spots the laden tram
could only just pass; the putter had to flatten himself, to push on his
knees, in order not to break his head, and besides this the wood was
already bending and yielding. One could see it broken in the middle in
long pale rents like an over-weak crutch. One had to be careful not to
graze oneself in these fractures; and beneath the slow crushing, which
caused the splitting of billets of oak as large as the thigh, one had
to glide almost on one's belly with a secret fear of suddenly hearing
one's back break.

"Again!" said Catherine, laughing.

tienne's tram had gone off the rails at the most difficult spot. He
could not roll straight on these rails which sank in the damp earth,
and he swore, became angry, and fought furiously with the wheels, which
he could not get back into place in spite of exaggerated efforts.

"Wait a bit," said the young girl. "If you get angry it will never
go." Skilfully she had glided down and thrust her buttocks beneath the
tram, and by putting the weight on her loins she raised it and replaced
it. The weight was seven hundred kilograms. Surprised and ashamed, he
stammered excuses.

She was obliged to show him how to straddle his legs and brace his feet
against the planking on both sides of the gallery, in order to give
himself a more solid fulcrum. The body had to be bent, the arms made
stiff so as to push with all the muscles of the shoulders and hips.
During the journey he followed her and watched her proceed with tense
back, her fists so low that she seemed trotting on all fours, like one
of those dwarf beasts that perform at circuses. She sweated, panted,
her joints cracked, but without a complaint, with the indifference of
custom, as if it were the common wretchedness of all to live thus bent
double. But he could not succeed in doing as much; his shoes troubled
him, his body seemed broken by walking in this way with lowered
head. At the end of a few minutes the position became a torture, an
intolerable anguish, so painful that he got on his knees for a moment
to straighten himself and breathe.

Then at the upbrow there was more labour. She taught him to fill his
tram quickly. At the top and bottom of this inclined plane, which
served all the cuttings from one level to the other, there was a
trammer--the brakesman above, the receiver below. These scamps of
twelve to fifteen years shouted abominable words to each other, and
to warn them it was necessary to yell still more violently. Then, as
soon as there was an empty tram to send back, the receiver gave the
signal and the putter embarked her full tram, the weight of which made
the other ascend when the brakesman loosened his brake. Below, in the
bottom gallery, were formed the trains which the horses drew to the
shaft.

"Here, you confounded rascals," cried Catherine in the inclined way,
which was wood-lined, about a hundred metres long, and resounded like a
gigantic trumpet.

The trammers must have been resting, for neither of them replied. On
all the levels haulage had stopped. A shrill girl's voice said at last:

"One of them must be on Mouquette, sure enough!"

There was a roar of laughter, and the putters of the whole seam held
their sides.

"Who is that?" asked tienne of Catherine.

The latter named little Lydie, a scamp who knew more than she ought,
and who pushed her tram as stoutly as a woman in spite of her doll's
arms. As to Mouquette, she was quite capable of being with both the
trammers at once.

But the voice of the receiver arose, shouting out to load. Doubtless a
captain was passing beneath. Haulage began again on the nine levels,
and one only heard the regular calls of the trammers, and the snorting
of the putters arriving at the upbrow and steaming like over-laden
mares. It was the element of bestiality which breathed in the pit, the
sudden desire of the male, when a miner met one of these girls on all
fours, with her flanks in the air and her hips bursting through her
boy's breeches.

And on each journey tienne found again at the bottom the stuffiness
of the cutting, the hollow and broken cadence of the axes, the deep
painful sighs of the pikemen persisting in their work. All four were
naked, mixed up with the coal, soaked with black mud up to the cap.
At one moment it had been necessary to free Maheu, who was gasping,
and to remove the planks so that the coal could fall into the passage.
Zacharie and Levaque became enraged with the seam, which was now
hard, they said, and which would make the condition of their account
disastrous. Chaval turned, lying for a moment on his back, abusing
tienne, whose presence decidedly exasperated him.

"A sort of worm; hasn't the strength of a girl! Are you going to fill
your tub? It's to spare your arms, eh? Damned if I don't keep back the
ten sous if you get us one refused!"

The young man avoided replying, too happy at present to have found
this convict's labour and accepting the brutal rule of the worker by
master worker. But he could no longer walk, his feet were bleeding, his
limbs torn by horrible cramps, his body confined in an iron girdle.
Fortunately it was ten o'clock, and the stall decided to have breakfast.

Maheu had a watch, but he did not even look at it. At the bottom of
this starless night he was never five minutes out. All put on their
shirts and jackets. Then, descending from the cutting they squatted
down, their elbows to their sides, their buttocks on their heels, in
that posture so habitual with miners that they keep it even when out
of the mine, without feeling the need of a stone or a beam to sit
on. And each, having taken out his brick, bit seriously at the thick
slice, uttering occasional words on the morning's work. Catherine,
who remained standing, at last joined tienne, who had stretched
himself out farther along, across the rails, with his back against the
planking. There was a place there almost dry.

"You don't eat?" she said to him, with her mouth full and her brick in
her hand.

Then she remembered that this youth, wandering about at night without a
sou, perhaps had not a bit of bread.

"Will you share with me?"

And as he refused, declaring that he was not hungry, while his voice
trembled with the gnawing in his stomach, she went on cheerfully:

"Ah! if you are fastidious! But here, I've only bitten on that side.
I'll give you this."

She had already broken the bread and butter into two pieces. The young
man, taking his half, restrained himself from devouring it all at once,
and placed his arms on his thighs, so that she should not see how he
trembled. With her quiet air of good comradeship she lay beside him, at
full length on her stomach, with her chin in one hand, slowly eating
with the other. Their lamps, placed between them, lit up their faces.

Catherine looked at him a moment in silence. She must have found him
handsome, with his delicate face and black moustache. She vaguely
smiled with pleasure.

"Then you are an engine-driver, and they sent you away from your
railway. Why?"

"Because I struck my chief."

She remained stupefied, overwhelmed, with her hereditary ideas of
subordination and passive obedience.

"I ought to say that I had been drinking," he went on, and when I drink
I get mad--I could devour myself, and I could devour other people. Yes;
I can't swallow two small glasses without wanting to kill someone. Then
I am ill for two days."

"You mustn't drink," she said, seriously.

"Ah, don't be afraid. I know myself."

And he shook his head. He hated brandy with the hatred of the last
child of a race of drunkards, who suffered in his flesh from all those
ancestors, soaked and driven mad by alcohol to such a point that the
least drop had become poison to him.

"It is because of mother that I didn't like being turned into the
street," he said, after having swallowed a mouthful. "Mother is not
happy, and I used to send her a five-franc piece now and then."

"Where is she, then, your mother?"

"At Paris. Laundress, Rue de la Goutte-d'or."

There was silence. When he thought of these things a tremor dimmed his
dark eyes, the sudden anguish of the injury he brooded over in his fine
youthful strength. For a moment he remained with his looks buried in
the darkness of the mine; and at that depth, beneath the weight and
suffocation of the earth, he saw his childhood again, his mother still
beautiful and strong, forsaken by his father, then taken up again after
having married another man, living with the two men who ruined her,
rolling with them in the gutter in drink and ordure. It was down there,
he recalled the street, the details came back to him; the dirty linen
in the middle of the shop, the drunken carousals that made the house
stink, and the jaw-breaking blows.

"Now," he began again, in a slow voice, "I haven't even thirty sous to
make her presents with. She will die of misery, sure enough."

He shrugged his shoulders with despair, and again bit at his bread and
butter.

"Will you drink?" asked Catherine, uncorking her tin. "Oh, it's coffee,
it won't hurt you. One gets dry when one eats like that."

But he refused; it was quite enough to have taken half her bread.
However, she insisted good-naturedly, and said at last:

"Well, I will drink before you since you are so polite. Only you can't
refuse now, it would be rude."

She held out her tin to him. She had got on to her knees and he saw
her quite close to him, lit up by the two lamps. Why had he found her
ugly? Now that she was black, her face powdered with fine charcoal,
she seemed to him singularly charming. In this face surrounded by
shadow, the teeth in the broad mouth shone with whiteness, while the
eyes looked large and gleamed with a greenish reflection, like a cat's
eyes. A lock of red hair which had escaped from her cap tickled her ear
and made her laugh. She no longer seemed so young, she might be quite
fourteen.

"To please you," he said, drinking and giving her back the tin.

She swallowed a second mouthful and forced him to take one too, wishing
to share, she said; and that little tin that went from one mouth to
the other amused them. He suddenly asked himself if he should not take
her in his arms and kiss her lips. She had large lips of a pale rose
colour, made vivid by the coal, which tormented him with increasing
desire. But he did not dare, intimidated before her, only having known
girls on the streets at Lille of the lowest order, and not realizing
how one ought to behave with a work-girl still living with her family.

"You must be about fourteen then?" he asked, after having gone back to
his bread. She was astonished, almost angry.

"What? fourteen! But I am fifteen! It's true I'm not big. Girls don't
grow quick with us."

He went on questioning her and she told everything without boldness
or shame. For the rest she was not ignorant concerning man and woman,
although he felt that her body was virginal, with the virginity of a
child delayed in her sexual maturity by the environment of bad air and
weariness in which she lived. When he spoke of Mouquette, in order to
embarrass her, she told some horrible stories in a quiet voice, with
much amusement. Ah! she did some fine things! And as he asked if she
herself had no lovers, she replied jokingly that she did not wish to
vex her mother, but that it must happen some day. Her shoulders were
bent. She shivered a little from the coldness of her garments soaked in
sweat, with a gentle resigned air, ready to submit to things and men.

"People can find lovers when they all live together, can't they?"

"Sure enough!"

"And then it doesn't hurt any one. One doesn't tell the priest."

"Oh! the priest! I don't care for him! But there is the Black Man."

"What do you mean, the Black Man?"

"The old miner who comes back into the pit and wrings naughty girls'
necks."

He looked at her, afraid that she was making fun of him.

"You believe in those stupid things? Then you don't know anything."

"Yes, I do. I can read and write. That is useful among us; in father
and mother's time they learnt nothing."

She was certainly very charming. When she had finished her bread and
butter, he would take her and kiss her on her large rosy lips. It
was the resolution of timidity, a thought of violence which choked
his voice. These boy's clothes--this jacket and these breeches--on
the girl's flesh excited and troubled him. He had swallowed his last
mouthful. He drank from the tin and gave it back for her to empty. Now
the moment for action had come, and he cast a restless glance at the
miners farther on. But a shadow blocked the gallery.

For a moment Chaval stood and looked at them from afar. He came
forward, having assured himself that Maheu could not see him; and as
Catherine was seated on the earth he seized her by the shoulders, drew
her head back, and tranquilly crushed her mouth beneath a brutal kiss,
affecting not to notice tienne. There was in that kiss an act of
possession, a sort of jealous resolution.

However, the young girl was offended.

"Let me go, do you hear?"

He kept hold of her head and looked into her eyes. His moustache and
small red beard flamed in his black face with its large eagle nose. He
let her go at last, and went away without speaking a word.

A shudder had frozen tienne. It was stupid to have waited. He could
certainly not kiss her now, for she would, perhaps, think that he
wished to behave like the other. In his wounded vanity he experienced
real despair.

"Why did you lie?" he said, in a low voice. "He's your lover."

"But no, I swear," she cried. "There is not that between us. Sometimes
he likes a joke; he doesn't even belong here; it's six months since he
came from the Pas-de-Calais."

Both rose; work was about to be resumed. When she saw him so cold she
seemed annoyed. Doubtless she found him handsomer than the other; she
would have preferred him perhaps. The idea of some amiable, consoling
relationship disturbed her; and when the young man saw with surprise
that his lamp was burning blue with a large pale ring, she tried at
least to amuse him.

"Come, I will show you something," she said, in a friendly way.

When she had led him to the bottom of the cutting, she pointed out to
him a crevice in the coal. A slight bubbling escaped from it, a little
noise like the warbling of a bird.

"Put your hand there; you'll feel the wind. It's fire-damp."

He was surprised. Was that all? Was that the terrible thing which blew
everything up? She laughed, she said there was a good deal of it to-day
to make the flame of the lamps so blue.

"Now, if you've done chattering, lazy louts!" cried Maheu's rough voice.

Catherine and tienne hastened to fill their trams, and pushed them
to the upbrow with stiffened back, crawling beneath the bossy roof of
the passage. Even after the second journey, the sweat ran off them and
their joints began to crack.

The pikemen had resumed work in the cutting. The men often shortened
their breakfast to avoid getting cold; and their bricks, eaten in this
way, far from the sun, with silent voracity, loaded their stomachs
with lead. Stretched on their sides they hammered more loudly, with
the one fixed idea of filling a large number of trams. Every thought
disappeared in this rage for gain which was so hard to earn. They no
longer felt the water which streamed on them and swelled their limbs,
the cramps of forced attitudes, the suffocation of the darkness in
which they grew pale, like plants put in a cellar. Yet, as the day
advanced, the air became more poisoned and heated with the smoke of
the lamps, with the pestilence of their breaths, with the asphyxia of
the fire-damp--blinding to the eyes like spiders' webs--which only
the aeration of the night could sweep away. At the bottom of their
mole-hill, beneath the weight of the earth, with no more breath in
their inflamed lungs, they went on hammering.




CHAPTER V


Maheu, without looking at his watch which he had left in his jacket,
stopped and said:

"One o'clock directly. Zacharie, is it done?"

The young man had just been at the planking. In the midst of his labour
he had been lying on his back, with dreamy eyes, thinking over a game
of hockey of the night before. He woke up and replied:

"Yes, it will do; we shall see to-morrow."

And he came back to take his place at the cutting. Levaque and Chaval
had also dropped their picks. They were all resting. They wiped their
faces on their naked arms and looked at the roof, in which slaty masses
were cracking. They only spoke about their work.

"Another chance," murmured Chaval, "of getting into loose earth. They
didn't take account of that in the bargain."

"Rascals!" growled Levaque. "They only want to bury us in it."

Zacharie began to laugh. He cared little for the work and the rest,
but it amused him to hear the Company abused. In his placid way Maheu
explained that the nature of the soil changed every twenty metres. One
must be just; they could not foresee everything. Then, when the two
others went on talking against the masters, he became restless, and
looked around him.

"Hush! that's enough."

"You're right," said Levaque, also lowering his voice; "it isn't
wholesome."

A morbid dread of spies haunted them, even at this depth, as if the
shareholders' coal, while still in the seam, might have ears.

"That won't prevent me," added Chaval loudly, in a defiant manner,
"from lodging a brick in the belly of that damned Dansaert, if he talks
to me as he did the other day. I won't prevent him, I won't, from
buying pretty girls with a white skin."

This time Zacharie burst out laughing. The head captain's love for
Pierronne was a constant joke in the pit. Even Catherine rested on her
shovel at the bottom of the cutting, holding her sides, and in a few
words told tienne the joke; while Maheu became angry, seized by a fear
which he could not conceal.

"Will you hold your tongue, eh? Wait till you're alone if you want to
get into trouble."

He was still speaking when the sound of steps was heard in the upper
gallery. Almost immediately the engineer of the mine, little Ngrel,
as the workmen called him among themselves, appeared at the top of the
cutting, accompanied by Dansaert, the head captain.

"Didn't I say so?" muttered Maheu. "There's always someone there,
rising out of the ground."

Paul Ngrel, M. Hennebeau's nephew, was a young man of twenty-six,
refined and handsome, with curly hair and brown moustache. His pointed
nose and sparkling eyes gave him the air of an amiable ferret of
sceptical intelligence, which changed into an abrupt authoritative
manner in his relations with the workmen. He was dressed like them, and
like them smeared with coal; to make them respect him he exhibited a
dare-devil courage, passing through the most difficult spots and always
first when landslips or fire-damp explosions occurred.

"Here we are, are we not, Dansaert?" he asked.

The head captain, a coarse-faced Belgian, with a large sensual nose,
replied with exaggerated politeness:

"Yes, Monsieur Ngrel. Here is the man who was taken on this morning."

Both of them had slid down into the middle of the cutting. They made
tienne come up. The engineer raised his lamp and looked at him without
asking any questions.

"Good," he said at last. "But I don't like unknown men to be picked up
from the road. Don't do it again."

He did not listen to the explanations given to him, the necessities of
work, the desire to replace women by men for the haulage. He had begun
to examine the roof while the pikemen had taken up their picks again.
Suddenly he called out:

"I say there, Maheu; have you no care for life? By heavens! you will
all be buried here!"

"Oh! it's solid," replied the workman tranquilly.

"What! solid! but the rock is giving already, and you are planting
props at more than two metres, as if you grudged it! Ah! you are all
alike. You will let your skull be flattened rather than leave the seam
to give the necessary time to the timbering! I must ask you to prop
that immediately. Double the timbering--do you understand?"

And in face of the unwillingness of the miners who disputed the point,
saying that they were good judges of their safety, he became angry.

"Go along! when your heads are smashed, is it you who will have to bear
the consequences? Not at all! it will be the Company which will have to
pay you pensions, you or your wives. I tell you again that we know you;
in order to get two extra trams by evening you would sell your skins."

Maheu, in spite of the anger which was gradually mastering him, still
answered steadily:

"If they paid us enough we should prop it better."

The engineer shrugged his shoulders without replying. He had descended
the cutting, and only said in conclusion, from below:

"You have an hour. Set to work, all of you; and I give you notice that
the stall is fined three francs."

A low growl from the pikemen greeted these words. The force of the
system alone restrained them, that military system which, from the
trammer to the head captain, ground one beneath the other. Chaval
and Levaque, however, made a furious gesture, while Maheu restrained
them by a glance, and Zacharie shrugged his shoulders chaffingly. But
tienne was, perhaps, most affected. Since he had found himself at the
bottom of this hell a slow rebellion was rising within him. He looked
at the resigned Catherine, with her lowered back. Was it possible to
kill oneself at this hard toil, in this deadly darkness, and not even
to gain the few pence to buy one's daily bread?

However, Ngrel went off with Dansaert, who was content to approve by
a continual movement of his head. And their voices again rose; they
had just stopped once more, and were examining the timbering in the
gallery, which the pikemen were obliged to look after for a length of
ten metres behind the cutting.

"Didn't I tell you that they care nothing?" cried the engineer. "And
you! why, in the devil's name, don't you watch them?"

"But I do--I do," stammered the head captain. "One gets tired of
repeating things."

Ngrel called loudly:

"Maheu! Maheu!"

They all came down. He went on:

"Do you see that? Will that hold? It's a twopenny-halfpenny
construction! Here is a beam which the posts don't carry already, it
was done so hastily. By Jove! I understand how it is that the mending
costs us so much. It'll do, won't it? if it lasts as long as you have
the care of it; and then it may go smash, and the Company is obliged to
have an army of repairers. Look at it down there; it is mere botching!"

Chaval wished to speak, but he silenced him.

"No! I know what you are going to say. Let them pay you more, eh? Very
well! I warn you that you will force the managers to do something: they
will pay you the planking separately, and proportionately reduce the
price of the trams. We shall see if you will gain that way! Meanwhile,
prop that over again, at once; I shall pass to-morrow."

Amid the dismay caused by this threat he went away. Dansaert, who had
been so humble, remained behind a few moments, to say brutally to the
men:

"You get me into a row, you here. I'll give you something more than
three francs fine, I will. Look out!"

Then, when he had gone, Maheu broke out in his turn:

"By God! what's fair is fair! I like people to be calm, because that's
the only way of getting along, but at last they make you mad. Did you
hear? The tram lowered, and the planking separately! Another way of
paying us less. By God it is!"

He looked for someone upon whom to vent his anger, and saw Catherine
and tienne swinging their arms.

"Will you just fetch me some wood! What does it matter to you? I'll put
my foot into you somewhere!"

tienne went to carry it without rancour for this rough speech, so
furious himself against the masters that he thought the miners too
good-natured. As for the others, Levaque and Chaval had found relief in
strong language. All of them, even Zacharie, were timbering furiously.
For nearly half an hour one only heard the creaking of wood wedged in
by blows of the hammer.

They no longer spoke, they snorted, became enraged with the rock, which
they would have hustled and driven back by the force of their shoulders
if they had been able.

"That's enough," said Maheu at last, worn out with anger and fatigue.
"An hour and a half! A fine day's work! We shan't get fifty sous! I'm
off. This disgusts me."

Though there was still half an hour of work left he dressed himself.
The others imitated him. The mere sight of the cutting enraged them. As
the putter had gone back to the haulage they called her, irritated at
her zeal: let the coal take care of itself. And the six, their tools
under their arms, set out to walk the two kilometres back, returning to
the shaft by the road of the morning.

At the chimney Catherine and tienne were delayed while the pikemen
slid down. They met little Lydie, who stopped in a gallery to let them
pass, and told them of the disappearance of Mouquette, whose nose had
been bleeding so much that she had been away an hour, bathing her face
somewhere, no one knew where. Then, when they left her, the child began
again to push her tram, weary and muddy, stiffening her insect-like
arms and legs like a lean black ant struggling with a load that was too
heavy for it. They let themselves down on their backs, flattening their
shoulders for fear of scratching the skin on their foreheads, and they
walked so close to the polished rock at the back of the stalls that
they were obliged from time to time to hold on to the woodwork, so that
their backsides should not catch fire, as they said jokingly.

Below they found themselves alone. Red stars disappeared afar at a
bend in the passage. Their cheerfulness fell, they began to walk with
the heavy step of fatigue, she in front, he behind. Their lamps were
blackened. He could scarcely see her, drowned in a sort of smoky mist;
and the idea that she was a girl disturbed him because he felt that it
was stupid not to embrace her, and yet the recollection of the other
man prevented him. Certainly she had lied to him: the other was her
lover, they lay together on all those heaps of slaty coal, for she had
a loose woman's gait. He sulked without reason, as if she had deceived
him. She, however, every moment turned round, warned him of obstacles,
and seemed to invite him to be affectionate. They were so lost here,
it would have been so easy to laugh together like good friends! At
last they entered the large haulage gallery; it was a relief to the
indecision from which he was suffering; while she once more had a
saddened look, the regret for a happiness which they would not find
again.

Now the subterranean life rumbled around them with a continual passing
of captains, the come and go of the trams drawn by trotting horses.
Lamps starred the night everywhere. They had to efface themselves
against the rock to leave the path free to shadowy men and beasts,
whose breath came against their faces. Jeanlin, running barefooted
behind his tram, cried out some naughtiness to them which they could
not hear amid the thunder of the wheels. They still went on, she now
silent, he not recognizing the turnings and roads of the morning, and
fancying that she was leading him deeper and deeper into the earth; and
what specially troubled him was the cold, an increasing cold which he
had felt on emerging from the cutting, and which caused him to shiver
the more the nearer they approached the shaft. Between the narrow walls
the column of air now blew like a tempest. He despaired of ever coming
to the end, when suddenly they found themselves in the pit-eye hall.

Chaval cast a sidelong glance at them, his mouth drawn with suspicion.
The others were there, covered with sweat in the icy current, silent
like himself, swallowing their grunts of rage. They had arrived
too soon and could not be taken to the top for half an hour, more
especially since some complicated manoeuvres were going on for
lowering a horse. The porters were still rolling the trams with the
deafening sound of old iron in movement, and the cages were flying up,
disappearing in the rain which fell from the black hole. Below, the
sump, a cesspool ten metres deep, filled with this streaming water,
also exhaled its muddy moisture. Men were constantly moving around the
shaft, pulling the signal cords, pressing on the arms of levers, in the
midst of this spray in which their garments were soaked. The reddish
light of three open lamps cut out great moving shadows and gave to this
subterranean hall the air of a villainous cavern, some bandits' forge
near a torrent.

Maheu made one last effort. He approached Pierron, who had gone on duty
at six o'clock.

"Here! you might as well let us go up."

But the porter, a handsome fellow with strong limbs and a gentle face,
refused with a frightened gesture.

"Impossible: ask the captain. They would fine me."

Fresh growls were stifled. Catherine bent forward and said in tienne's
ear:

"Come and see the stable, then. That's a comfortable place!"

And they had to escape without being seen, for it was forbidden to go
there. It was on the left, at the end of a short gallery. Twenty-five
metres in length and nearly four high, cut in the rock and vaulted with
bricks, it could contain twenty horses. It was, in fact, comfortable
there. There was a pleasant warmth of living beasts, the good odour of
fresh and well-kept litter. The only lamp threw out the calm rays of a
night-light. There were horses there, at rest, who turned their heads,
with their large infantine eyes, then went back to their hay, without
haste, like fat well-kept workers, loved by everybody.

But as Catherine was reading aloud their names, written on zinc plates
over the mangers, she uttered a slight cry, seeing something suddenly
rise before her. It was Mouquette, who emerged in fright from a pile of
straw in which she was sleeping. On Monday, when she was overtired with
her Sunday's spree, she gave herself a violent blow on the nose, and
left her cutting under the pretence of seeking water, to bury herself
here with the horses in the warm litter. Her father, being weak with
her, allowed it, at the risk of getting into trouble.

Just then, Mouque, the father, entered, a short, bald, worn-out looking
man, but still stout, which is rare in an old miner of fifty. Since he
had been made a groom, he chewed to such a degree that his gums bled in
his black mouth. On seeing the two with his daughter, he became angry.

"What are you up to there, all of you? Come! up! The jades, bringing
a man here! It's a fine thing to come and do your dirty tricks in my
straw."

Mouquette thought it funny, and held her sides. But tienne, feeling
awkward, moved away, while Catherine smiled at him. As all three
returned to the pit-eye, Bbert and Jeanlin arrived there also with a
train of tubs. There was a stoppage for the manoeuvring of the cages,
and the young girl approached their horse, caressed it with her hand,
and talked about it to her companion. It was Bataille, the _doyen_
of the mine, a white horse who had lived below for ten years. These
ten years he had lived in this hole, occupying the same corner of the
stable, doing the same task along the black galleries without ever
seeing daylight. Very fat, with shining coat and a good-natured air,
he seemed to lead the existence of a sage, sheltered from the evils of
the world above. In this darkness, too, he had become very cunning.
The passage in which he worked had grown so familiar to him that he
could open the ventilation doors with his head, and he lowered himself
to avoid knocks at the narrow spots. Without doubt, also, he counted
his turns, for when he had made the regulation number of journeys he
refused to do any more, and had to be led back to his manger. Now
that old age was coming on, his cat's eyes were sometimes dimmed with
melancholy. Perhaps he vaguely saw again, in the depths of his obscure
dreams, the mill at which he was born, near Marchiennes, a mill placed
on the edge of the Scarpe, surrounded by large fields over which the
wind always blew. Something burnt in the air--an enormous lamp, the
exact appearance of which escaped his beast's memory--and he stood with
lowered head, trembling on his old feet, making useless efforts to
recall the sun.

Meanwhile, the manoeuvres went on in the shaft, the signal hammer had
struck four blows, and the horse was being lowered; there was always
excitement at such a time, for it sometimes happened that the beast
was seized by such terror that it was landed dead. When put into a net
at the top it struggled fiercely; then, when it felt the ground no
longer beneath it, it remained as if petrified and disappeared without
a quiver of the skin, with enlarged and fixed eyes. This animal being
too big to pass between the guides, it had been necessary, when hooking
it beneath the cage, to pull down the head and attach it to the flanks.
The descent lasted nearly three minutes, the engine being slowed as
a precaution. Below, the excitement was increasing. What then? Was
he going to be left on the road, hanging in the blackness? At last
he appeared in his stony immobility, his eye fixed and dilated with
terror. It was a bay horse hardly three years of age, called Trompette.

"Attention!" cried Father Mouque, whose duty it was to receive it.
"Bring him here, don't undo him yet."

Trompette was soon placed on the metal floor in a mass. Still he did
not move: he seemed in a nightmare in this obscure infinite hole, this
deep hall echoing with tumult. They were beginning to unfasten him
when Bataille, who had just been unharnessed, approached and stretched
out his neck to smell this companion who lay on the earth. The workmen
jokingly enlarged the circle. Well! what pleasant odour did he find in
him? But Bataille, deaf to mockery, became animated. He probably found
in him the good odour of the open air, the forgotten odour of the sun
on the grass. And he suddenly broke out into a sonorous neigh, full of
musical gladness, in which there seemed to be the emotion of a sob. It
was a greeting, the joy of those ancient things of which a gust had
reached him, the melancholy of one more prisoner who would not ascend
again until death.

"Ah! that animal Bataille!" shouted the workmen, amused at the antics
of their favourite, "he's talking with his mate."

Trompette was unbound, but still did not move. He remained on his
flank, as if he still felt the net restraining him, garrotted by fear.
At last they got him up with a lash of the whip, dazed and his limbs
quivering. And Father Mouque led away the two beasts, fraternizing
together.

"Here! Is it ready yet?" asked Maheu.

It was necessary to clear the cages, and besides it was yet ten
minutes before the hour for ascending. Little by little the stalls
emptied, and the miners returned from all the galleries. There were
already some fifty men there, damp and shivering, their inflamed
chests panting on every side. Pierron, in spite of his mawkish face,
struck his daughter Lydie, because she had left the cutting before
time. Zacharie slyly pinched Mouquette, with a joke about warming
himself. But the discontent increased; Chaval and Levaque narrated the
engineer's threat, the tram to be lowered in price, and the planking
paid separately. And exclamations greeted this scheme, a rebellion was
germinating in this little corner, nearly six hundred metres beneath
the earth. Soon they could not restrain their voices; these men, soiled
by coal, and frozen by the delay, accused the Company of killing half
their workers at the bottom, and starving the other half to death.
tienne listened, trembling.

"Quick, quick!" repeated the captain, Richomme, to the porters.

He hastened the preparations for the ascent, not wishing to be hard,
pretending not to hear. However, the murmurs became so loud that he
was obliged to notice them. They were calling out behind him that this
would not last always, and that one fine day the whole affair would be
smashed up.

"You're sensible," he said to Maheu; "make them hold their tongues.
When one hasn't got power one must have sense."

But Maheu, who was getting calm, and had at last become anxious, did
not interfere. Suddenly the voices fell; Ngrel and Dansaert, returning
from their inspection, entered from a gallery, both of them sweating.
The habit of discipline made the men stand in rows while the engineer
passed through the group without a word. He got into one tram, and the
head captain into another, the signal was sounded five times, ringing
for the butcher's meat, as they said for the masters; and the cage flew
up in the air in the midst of a gloomy silence.




CHAPTER VI


As he ascended in the cage heaped up with four others, tienne resolved
to continue his famished course along the roads. One might as well
die at once as go down to the bottom of that hell, where it was not
even possible to earn one's bread. Catherine, in the tram above him,
was no longer at his side with her pleasant enervating warmth; and he
preferred to avoid foolish thoughts and to go away, for with his wider
education he felt nothing of the resignation of this flock; he would
end by strangling one of the masters.

Suddenly he was blinded. The ascent had been so rapid that he was
stunned by the daylight, and his eyelids quivered in the brightness to
which he had already grown unaccustomed. It was none the less a relief
to him to feel the cage settle on to the bars. A lander opened the
door, and a flood of workmen leapt out of the trams.

"I say, Mouquet," whispered Zacharie in the lander's ear, "are we off
to the Volcan to-night?"

The Volcan was a caf-concert at Montsou. Mouquet winked his left eye
with a silent laugh which made his jaws gape. Short and stout like his
father, he had the impudent face of a fellow who devours everything
without care for the morrow. Just then Mouquette came out in her turn,
and he gave her a formidable smack on the flank by way of fraternal
tenderness.

tienne hardly recognized the lofty nave of the receiving-hall, which
had before looked imposing in the ambiguous light of the lanterns.
It was simply bare and dirty; a dull light entered through the dusty
windows. The engine alone shone at the end with its copper; the
well-greased steel cables moved like ribbons soaked in ink, and the
pulleys above, the enormous scaffold which supported them, the cages,
the trams, all this prodigality of metal made the hall look sombre with
their hard grey tones of old iron. Without ceasing, the rumbling of the
wheels shook the metal floor; while from the coal thus put in motion
there arose a fine charcoal powder which powdered black the soil, the
walls, even the joists of the steeple.

But Chaval, after glancing at the table of counters in the receiver's
little glass office, came back furious. He had discovered that two
of their trams had been rejected, one because it did not contain the
regulation amount, the other because the coal was not clean.

"This finishes the day," he cried. "Twenty sous less again! This is
because we take on lazy rascals who use their arms as a pig does his
tail!"

And his sidelong look at tienne completed his thought.

The latter was tempted to reply by a blow. Then he asked himself what
would be the use since he was going away. This decided him absolutely.

"It's not possible to do it right the first day," said Maheu, to
restore peace; "he'll do better to-morrow."

They were all none the less soured, and disturbed by the need to
quarrel. As they passed to the lamp cabin to give up their lamps,
Levaque began to abuse the lamp-man, whom he accused of not properly
cleaning his lamp. They only slackened down a little in the shed where
the fire was still burning. It had even been too heavily piled up, for
the stove was red and the vast room, without a window, seemed to be
in flames, to such a degree did the reflection make bloody the walls.
And there were grunts of joy, all the backs were roasted at a distance
till they smoked like soup. When their flanks were burning they cooked
their bellies. Mouquette had tranquilly let down her breeches to dry
her chemise. Some lads were making fun of her; they burst out laughing
because she suddenly showed them her posterior, a gesture which in her
was the extreme expression of contempt.

"I'm off," said Chaval, who had shut up his tools in his box.

No one moved. Only Mouquette hastened, and went out behind him on the
pretext that they were both going back to Montsou. But the others went
on joking; they knew that he would have no more to do with her.

Catherine, however, who seemed preoccupied, was speaking in a low voice
to her father. The latter was surprised; then he agreed with a nod; and
calling tienne to give him back his bundle:

"Listen," he said: "you haven't a sou; you will have time to starve
before the fortnight's out. Shall I try and get you credit somewhere?"

The young man stood for a moment confused. He had been just about to
claim his thirty sous and go. But shame restrained him before the
young girl. She looked at him fixedly; perhaps she would think he was
shirking the work.

"You know I can promise you nothing," Maheu went on. "They can but
refuse us."

Then tienne consented. They would refuse. Besides, it would bind him
to nothing, he could still go away after having eaten something. Then
he was dissatisfied at not having refused, seeing Catherine's joy, a
pretty laugh, a look of friendship, happy at having been useful to him.
What was the good of it all?

When they had put on their sabots and shut their boxes, the Maheus left
the shed, following their comrades, who were leaving one by one after
they had warmed themselves. tienne went behind. Levaque and his urchin
joined the band. But as they crossed the screening place a scene of
violence stopped them.

It was in a vast shed, with beams blackened by the powder, and large
shutters, through which blew a constant current of air. The coal trams
arrived straight from the receiving-room, and were then overturned by
the tipping-cradles on to hoppers, long iron slides; and to right and
to left of these the screeners, mounted on steps and armed with shovels
and rakes, separated the stone and swept together the clean coal, which
afterwards fell through funnels into the railway wagons beneath the
shed.

Philomne Levaque was there, thin and pale, with the sheep-like face of
a girl who spat blood. With head protected by a fragment of blue wool,
and hands and arms black to the elbows, she was screening beneath an
old witch, the mother of Pierronne, the Brul, as she was called, with
terrible owl's eyes, and a mouth drawn in like a miser's purse. They
were abusing each other, the young one accusing the elder of raking her
stones so that she could not get a basketful in ten minutes. They were
paid by the basket, and these quarrels were constantly arising. Hair
was flying, and hands were making black marks on red faces.

"Give it her bloody well!" cried Zacharie, from above, to his mistress.

All the screeners laughed. But the Brul turned snappishly on the young
man.

"Now, then, dirty beast! You'd better to own the two kids you have
filled her with. Fancy that, a slip of eighteen, who can't stand
straight!"

Maheu had to prevent his son from descending to see, as he said, the
colour of this carcass's skin.

A foreman came up and the rakes again began to move the coal. One could
only see, all along the hoppers, the round backs of women squabbling
incessantly over the stones.

Outside, the wind had suddenly quieted; a moist cold was falling from a
grey sky. The colliers thrust out their shoulders, folded their arms,
and set forth irregularly, with a rolling gait which made their large
bones stand out beneath their thin garments. In the daylight they
looked like a band of Negroes thrown into the mud. Some of them had not
finished their bricks; and the remains of the bread carried between the
shirt and the jacket made them humpbacked.

"Hallo! there's Bouteloup." said Zacharie, grinning.

Levaque without stopping exchanged two sentences with his lodger, a big
dark fellow of thirty-five with a placid, honest air:

"Is the soup ready, Louis?"

"I believe it is."

"Then the wife is good-humoured to-day."

"Yes, I believe she is."

Other miners bound for the earth-cutting came up, new bands which one
by one were engulfed in the pit. It was the three o'clock descent, more
men for the pit to devour, the gangs who would replace the sets of the
pikemen at the bottom of the passages. The mine never rested; day and
night human insects were digging out the rock six hundred metres below
the beetroot fields.

However, the youngsters went ahead. Jeanlin confided to Bbert a
complicated plan for getting four sous' worth of tobacco on credit,
while Lydie followed respectfully at a distance. Catherine came with
Zacharie and tienne. None of them spoke. And it was only in front of
the Avantage inn that Maheu and Levaque rejoined them.

"Here we are," said the former to tienne; "will you come in?"

They separated. Catherine had stood a moment motionless, gazing once
more at the young man with her large eyes full of greenish limpidity
like spring water, the crystal deepened the more by her black face. She
smiled and disappeared with the others on the road that led up to the
settlement.

The inn was situated between the village and the mine, at the crossing
of two roads. It was a two-storied brick house, whitewashed from top
to bottom, enlivened around the windows by a broad pale-blue border.
On a square sign-board nailed above the door, one read in yellow
letters: _A l'Avantage, licensed to Rasseneur._ Behind stretched
a skittle-ground enclosed by a hedge. The Company, who had done
everything to buy up the property placed within its vast territory, was
in despair over this inn in the open fields, at the very entrance of
the Voreux.

"Go in," said Maheu to tienne.

The little parlour was quite bare with its white walls, its three
tables and its dozen chairs, its deal counter about the size of a
kitchen dresser. There were a dozen glasses at most, three bottles of
liqueur, a decanter, a small zinc tank with a pewter tap to hold the
beer; and nothing else--not a figure, not a little table, not a game.
In the metal fireplace, which was bright and polished, a coal fire was
burning quietly. On the flags a thin layer of white sand drank up the
constant moisture of this water-soaked land.

"A glass," ordered Maheu of a big fair girl, a neighbour's daughter who
sometimes took charge of the place. "Is Rasseneur in?"

The girl turned the tap, replying that the master would soon return.
In a long, slow gulp, the miner emptied half his glass to sweep away
the dust which filled his throat. He offered nothing to his companion.
One other customer, a damp and besmeared miner, was seated before the
table, drinking his beer in silence, with an air of deep meditation. A
third entered, was served in response to a gesture, paid and went away
without uttering a word.

But a stout man of thirty-eight, with a round shaven face and a
good-natured smile, now appeared. It was Rasseneur, a former pikeman
whom the Company had dismissed three years ago, after a strike. A very
good workman, he could speak well, put himself at the head of every
opposition, and had at last become the chief of the discontented. His
wife already held a license, like many miners' wives; and when he was
thrown on to the street he became an innkeeper himself; having found
the money, he placed his inn in front of the Voreux as a provocation
to the Company. Now his house had prospered; it had become a centre,
and he was enriched by the animosity he had gradually fostered in the
hearts of his old comrades.

"This is a lad I hired this morning," said Maheu at once. "Have you
got one of your two rooms free, and will you give him credit for a
fortnight?"

Rasseneur's broad face suddenly expressed great suspicion. He examined
tienne with a glance, and replied, without giving himself the trouble
to express any regret:

"My two rooms are taken. Can't do it."

The young man expected this refusal; but it hurt him nevertheless,
and he was surprised at the sudden grief he experienced in going. No
matter; he would go when he had received his thirty sous. The miner
who was drinking at a table had left. Others, one by one, continued to
come in to clear their throats, then went on their road with the same
slouching gait. It was a simple swilling without joy or passion, the
silent satisfaction of a need.

"Then, there's no news?" Rasseneur asked in a peculiar tone of Maheu,
who was finishing his beer in small gulps.

The latter turned his head, and saw that only tienne was near.

"There's been more squabbling. Yes, about the timbering." He told the
story. The innkeeper's face reddened, swelling with emotion, which
flamed in his skin and eyes. At last he broke out:

"Well, well! if they decide to lower the price they are done for."

tienne constrained him. However he went on, throwing sidelong glances
in his direction. And there were reticences, and implications; he was
talking of the manager, M. Hennebeau, of his wife, of his nephew, the
little Ngrel, without naming them, repeating that this could not go
on, that things were bound to smash up one of these fine days. The
misery was too great; and he spoke of the workshops that were closing,
the workers who were going away. During the last month he had given
more than six pounds of bread a day. He had heard the day before, that
M. Deneulin, the owner of a neighbouring pit, could scarcely keep
going. He had also received a letter from Lille full of disturbing
details.

"You know," he whispered, "it comes from that person you saw here one
evening."

But he was interrupted. His wife entered in her turn, a tall woman,
lean and keen, with a long nose and violet cheeks. She was a much more
radical politician than her husband.

"Pluchart's letter," she said. "Ah! if that fellow was master things
would soon go better."

tienne had been listening for a moment; he understood and became
excited over these ideas of misery and revenge. This name, suddenly
uttered, caused him to start. He said aloud, as if in spite of himself:

"I know him--Pluchart."

They looked at him. He had to add:

"Yes, I am an engine-man: he was my foreman at Lille. A capable man. I
have often talked with him."

Rasseneur examined him afresh; and there was a rapid change on his
face, a sudden sympathy. At last he said to his wife:

"It's Maheu who brings me this gentleman, one of his putters, to see if
there is a room for him upstairs, and if we can give him credit for a
fortnight."

Then the matter was settled in four words. There was a room; the
lodger had left that morning. And the innkeeper, who was very excited,
talked more freely, repeating that he only asked possibilities from
the masters, without demanding, like so many others, things that were
too hard to get. His wife shrugged her shoulders and demanded justice,
absolutely.

"Good evening," interrupted Maheu. "All that won't prevent men from
going down, and as long as they go there will be people working
themselves to death. Look how fresh you are, these three years that
you've been out of it."

"Yes, I'm very much better," declared Rasseneur, complacently.

tienne went as far as the door, thanking the miner, who was leaving;
but the latter nodded his head without adding a word, and the young
man watched him painfully climb up the road to the settlement. Madame
Rasseneur, occupied with serving customers, asked him to wait a minute,
when she would show him his room, where he could clean himself. Should
he remain? He again felt hesitation, a discomfort which made him regret
the freedom of the open road, the hunger beneath the sun, endured with
the joy of being one's own master. It seemed to him that he had lived
years from his arrival on the pit-bank, in the midst of squalls, to
those hours passed under the earth on his belly in the black passages.
And he shrank from beginning again; it was unjust and too hard. His
man's pride revolted at the idea of becoming a crushed and blinded
beast.

While tienne was thus debating with himself, his eyes, wandering over
the immense plain, gradually began to see it clearly. He was surprised;
he had not imagined the horizon was like this, when old Bonnemort had
pointed it out to him in the darkness. Before him he plainly saw the
Voreux in a fold of the earth, with its wood and brick buildings, the
tarred screening-shed, the slate-covered steeple, the engine-room
and the tall, pale red chimney, all massed together with that evil
air. But around these buildings the space extended, and he had not
imagined it so large, changed into an inky sea by the ascending waves
of coal soot, bristling with high trestles which carried the rails of
the foot-bridges, encumbered in one corner with the timber supply,
which looked like the harvest of a mown forest. Towards the right the
pit-bank hid the view, colossal as a barricade of giants, already
covered with grass in its older part, consumed at the other end by an
interior fire which had been burning for a year with a thick smoke,
leaving at the surface in the midst of the pale grey of the slates and
sandstones long trails of bleeding rust. Then the fields unrolled, the
endless fields of wheat and beetroot, naked at this season of the year,
marshes with scanty vegetation, cut by a few stunted willows, distant
meadows separated by slender rows of poplars. Very far away little
pale patches indicated towns, Marchiennes to the north, Montsou to the
south; while the forest of Vandame to the east bordered the horizon
with the violet line of its leafless trees. And beneath the livid sky,
in the faint daylight of this winter afternoon, it seemed as if all the
blackness of the Voreux, and all its flying coal dust, had fallen upon
the plain, powdering the trees, sanding the roads, sowing the earth.

tienne looked, and what especially surprised him was a canal, the
canalized stream of the Scarpe, which he had not seen in the night.
From the Voreux to Marchiennes this canal ran straight, like a dull
silver ribbon two leagues long, an avenue lined by large trees, raised
above the low earth, threading into space with the perspective of its
green banks, its pale water into which glided the vermilion of the
boats. Near one pit there was a wharf with moored vessels which were
laden directly from the trams at the foot-bridges. Afterwards the canal
made a curve, sloping by the marshes; and the whole soul of that smooth
plain appeared to lie in this geometrical stream, which traversed it
like a great road, carting coal and iron.

tienne's glance went up from the canal to the settlement built on the
height, of which he could only distinguish the red tiles. Then his eyes
rested again at the bottom of the clay slope, towards the Voreux, on
two enormous masses of bricks made and burnt on the spot. A branch of
the Company's railroad passed behind a paling, for the use of the pit.
They must be sending down the last miners to the earth-cutting. Only
one shrill note came from a truck pushed by men. One felt no longer the
unknown darkness, the inexplicable thunder, the flaming of mysterious
stars. Afar, the blast furnaces and the coke kilns had paled with the
dawn. There only remained, unceasingly, the escapement of the pump,
always breathing with the same thick, long breath, the ogre's breath of
which he could now see the grey steam, and which nothing could satiate.

Then tienne suddenly made up his mind. Perhaps he seemed to see again
Catherine's clear eyes, up there, at the entrance to the settlement.
Perhaps, rather, it was the wind of revolt which came from the Voreux.
He did not know, but he wished to go down again to the mine, to suffer
and to fight. And he thought fiercely of those people Bonnemort had
talked of, the crouching and sated god, to whom ten thousand starving
men gave their flesh without knowing it.




PART TWO




CHAPTER I


The Grgoires' property, Piolaine, was situated two kilometres to the
east of Montsou, on the Joiselle road. The house was a large square
building, without style, dating from the beginning of the last century.
Of all the land that once belonged to it there only remained some
thirty hectares, enclosed by walls, and easy to keep up. The orchard
and kitchen garden especially were everywhere spoken of, being famous
for the finest fruit and vegetables in the country. For the rest, there
was no park, only a small wood. The avenue of old limes, a vault of
foliage three hundred metres long, reaching from the gate to the porch,
was one of the curiosities of this bare plain, on which one could count
the large trees between Marchiennes and Beaugnies.

On that morning the Grgoires got up at eight o'clock. Usually they
never stirred until an hour later, being heavy sleepers; but last
night's tempest had disturbed them. And while her husband had gone
at once to see if the wind had made any havoc, Madame Grgoire went
down to the kitchen in her slippers and flannel dressing-gown. She was
short and stout, about fifty-eight years of age, and retained a broad,
surprised, dollish face beneath the dazzling whiteness of her hair.

"Mlanie," she said to the cook, "suppose you were to make the brioche
this morning, since the dough is ready. Mademoiselle will not get up
for half an hour yet, and she can eat it with her chocolate. Eh? It
will be a surprise."

The cook, a lean old woman who had served them for thirty years,
laughed.

"That's true! it will be a famous surprise. My stove is alight, and the
oven must be hot; and then Honorine can help me a bit."

Honorine, a girl of some twenty years, who had been taken in as a
child and brought up in the house, now acted as housemaid. Besides
these two women, the only other servant was the coachman, Francis, who
undertook the heavy work. A gardener and his wife were occupied with
the vegetables, the fruit, the flowers, and the poultry-yard. And as
service here was patriarchal, this little world lived together, like
one large family, on very good terms.

Madame Grgoire, who had planned this surprise of the brioche in bed,
waited to see the dough put in the oven. The kitchen was very large,
and one guessed it was the most important room in the house by its
extreme cleanliness and by the arsenal of saucepans, utensils, and pots
which filled it. It gave an impression of good feeding. Provisions
abounded, hanging from hooks or in cupboards.

"And let it be well glazed, won't you?" Madame Grgoire said as she
passed into the dining-room.

In spite of the hot-air stove which warmed the whole house, a coal fire
enlivened this room. In other respects it exhibited no luxury; a large
table, chairs, a mahogany sideboard; only two deep easy-chairs betrayed
a love of comfort, long happy hours of digestion. They never went into
the drawing-room, they remained here in a family circle.

Just then M. Grgoire came back dressed in a thick fustian jacket; he
also was ruddy for his sixty years, with large, good-natured, honest
features beneath the snow of his curly hair. He had seen the coachman
and the gardener; there had been no damage of importance, nothing but
a fallen chimney-pot. Every morning he liked to give a glance round
Piolaine, which was not large enough to cause him anxiety, and from
which he derived all the happiness of ownership.

"And Ccile?" he asked, "isn't she up yet then?"

"I can't make it out," replied his wife. "I thought I heard her moving."

The table was set; there were three cups on the white cloth. They sent
Honorine to see what had become of mademoiselle. But she came back
immediately, restraining her laughter, stifling her voice, as if she
were still upstairs in the bedroom.

"Oh! if monsieur and madame could see mademoiselle! She sleeps; oh! she
sleeps like an angel. One can't imagine it! It's a pleasure to look at
her."

The father and mother exchanged tender looks. He said, smiling:

"Will you come and see?"

"The poor little darling!" she murmured. "I'll come."

And they went up together. The room was the only luxurious one in the
house. It was draped in blue silk, and the furniture was lacquered
white, with blue tracery--a spoilt child's whim, which her parents had
gratified. In the vague whiteness of the bed, beneath the half-light
which came through a curtain that was drawn back, the young girl was
sleeping with her cheek resting on her naked arm. She was not pretty,
too healthy, in too vigorous condition, fully developed at eighteen;
but she had superb flesh, the freshness of milk, with her chestnut
hair, her round face, and little willful nose lost between her cheeks.
The coverlet had slipped down, and she was breathing so softly that her
respiration did not even lift her already well-developed bosom.

"That horrible wind must have prevented her from closing her eyes,"
said the mother softly.

The father imposed silence with a gesture. Both of them leant down
and gazed with adoration on this girl, in her virgin nakedness, whom
they had desired so long, and who had come so late, when they had no
longer hoped for her. They found her perfect, not at all too fat, and
could never feed her sufficiently. And she went on sleeping, without
feeling them near her, with their faces against hers. However, a slight
movement disturbed her motionless face. They feared that they would
wake her, and went out on tiptoe.

"Hush!" said M. Grgoire, at the door. "If she has not slept we must
leave her sleeping."

"As long as she likes, the darling!" agreed Madame Grgoire. "We will
wait."

They went down and seated themselves in the easy-chairs in the
dining-room; while the servants, laughing at mademoiselle's sound
sleep, kept the chocolate on the stove without grumbling. He took up a
newspaper; she knitted at a large woollen quilt. It was very hot, and
not a sound was heard in the silent house.

The Grgoires' fortune, about forty thousand francs a year, was
entirely invested in a share of the Montsou mines. They would
complacently narrate its origin, which dated from the very formation of
the Company.

Towards the beginning of the last century, there had been a mad search
for coal between Lille and Valenciennes. The success of those who held
the concession, which was afterwards to become the Anzin Company, had
turned all heads. In every commune the ground was tested; and societies
were formed and concessions grew up in a night. But among all the
obstinate seekers of that epoch, Baron Desrumaux had certainly left
the reputation for the most heroic intelligence. For forty years he
had struggled without yielding, in the midst of continual obstacles:
early searches unsuccessful, new pits abandoned at the end of long
months of work, landslips which filled up borings, sudden inundations
which drowned the workmen, hundreds of thousands of francs thrown
into the earth; then the squabbles of the management, the panics of
the shareholders, the struggle with the lords of the soil, who were
resolved not to recognize royal concessions if no treaty was first made
with themselves. He had at last founded the association of Desrumaux,
Fauquenoix and Co. to exploit the Montsou concession, and the pits
began to yield a small profit when two neighbouring concessions, that
of Cougny, belonging to the Comte de Cougny, and that of Joiselle,
belonging to the Cornille and Jenard Company, had nearly overwhelmed
him beneath the terrible assault of their competition. Happily, on the
25th August 1760, a treaty was made between the three concessions,
uniting them into a single one. The Montsou Mining Company was created,
such as it still exists to-day. In the distribution they had divided
the total property, according to the standard of the money of the
time, into twenty-four sous, of which each was subdivided into twelve
deniers, which made two hundred and eighty-eight deniers; and as the
denier was worth ten thousand francs the capital represented a sum of
nearly three millions. Desrumaux, dying but triumphant, received in
this division six sous and three deniers.

In those days the baron possessed Piolaine, which had three hundred
hectares belonging to it, and he had in his service as steward Honor
Grgoire, a Picardy lad, the great-grandfather of Lon Grgoire,
Ccile's father. When the Montsou treaty was made, Honor, who had
laid up savings to the amount of some fifty thousand francs, yielded
tremblingly to his master's unshakable faith. He took out ten thousand
francs in fine crowns, and took a denier, though with the fear of
robbing his children of that sum. His son Eugne, in fact, received
very small dividends; and as he had become a bourgeois and had been
foolish enough to throw away the other forty thousand francs of the
paternal inheritance in a company that came to grief, he lived meanly
enough. But the interest of the denier gradually increased. The fortune
began with Flicien, who was able to realize a dream with which his
grandfather, the old steward, had nursed his childhood--the purchase
of dismembered Piolaine, which he acquired as national property for
a ludicrous sum. However, bad years followed. It was necessary to
await the conclusion of the revolutionary catastrophes, and afterwards
Napoleon's bloody fall; and it was Lon Grgoire who profited at a
stupefying rate of progress by the timid and uneasy investment of his
great-grandfather. Those poor ten thousand francs grew and multiplied
with the Company's prosperity. From 1820 they had brought in one
hundred per cent, ten thousand francs. In 1844 they had produced twenty
thousand; in 1850, forty. During two years the dividend had reached the
prodigious figure of fifty thousand francs; the value of the denier,
quoted at the Lille bourse at a million, had centupled in a century.

M. Grgoire, who had been advised to sell out when this figure of a
million was reached, had refused with his smiling paternal air. Six
months later an industrial crisis broke out; the denier fell to six
hundred thousand francs. But he still smiled; he regretted nothing, for
the Grgoires had maintained an obstinate faith in their mine. It would
rise again: God Himself was not so solid. Then with his religious faith
was mixed profound gratitude towards an investment which for a century
had supported the family in doing nothing. It was like a divinity of
their own, whom their egoism surrounded with a kind of worship, the
benefactor of the hearth, lulling them in their great bed of idleness,
fattening them at their gluttonous table. From father to son it had
gone on. Why risk displeasing fate by doubting it? And at the bottom
of their fidelity there was a superstitious terror, a fear lest the
million of the denier might suddenly melt away if they were to realize
it and to put it in a drawer. It seemed to them more sheltered in the
earth, from which a race of miners, generations of starving people,
extracted it for them, a little every day, as they needed it.

For the rest, happiness rained on this house. M. Grgoire, when very
young, had married the daughter of a Marchiennes druggist, a plain,
penniless girl, whom he adored, and who repaid him with happiness. She
shut herself up in her household, and worshipped her husband, having
no other will but his. No difference of tastes separated them, their
desires were mingled in one idea of comfort; and they had thus lived
for forty years, in affection and little mutual services. It was a
well-regulated existence; the forty thousand francs were spent quietly,
and the savings expended on Ccile, whose tardy birth had for a moment
disturbed the budget. They still satisfied all her whims--a second
horse, two more carriages, toilets sent from Paris. But they tasted in
this one more joy; they thought nothing too good for their daughter,
although they had such a horror of display that they had preserved the
fashions of their youth. Every unprofitable expense seemed foolish to
them.

Suddenly the door opened, and a loud voice called out:

"Hallo! What now? Having breakfast without me!"

It was Ccile, just come from her bed, her eyes heavy with sleep. She
had simply put up her hair and flung on a white woollen dressing-gown.

"No, no!" said the mother; "you see we are all waiting. Eh? has the
wind prevented you from sleeping, poor darling?"

The young girl looked at her in great surprise.

"Has it been windy? I didn't know anything about it. I haven't moved
all night."

Then they thought this funny, and all three began to laugh; the
servants who were bringing in the breakfast also broke out laughing,
so amused was the household at the idea that mademoiselle had been
sleeping for twelve hours right off. The sight of the brioche completed
the expansion of their faces.

"What! Is it cooked, then?" said Ccile; "that must be a surprise for
me! That'll be good now, hot, with the chocolate!"

They sat down to table at last with the smoking chocolate in their
cups, and for a long time talked of nothing but the brioche. Mlanie
and Honorine remained to give details about the cooking and watched
them stuffing themselves with greasy lips, saying that it was a
pleasure to make a cake when one saw the masters enjoying it so much.

But the dogs began to bark loudly; perhaps they announced the music
mistress, who came from Marchiennes on Mondays and Fridays. A professor
of literature also came. All the young girl's education was thus
carried on at Piolaine in happy ignorance, with her childish whims,
throwing the book out of the window as soon as anything wearied her.

"It is M. Deneulin," said Honorine, returning.

Behind her, Deneulin, a cousin of M. Grgoire's, appeared without
ceremony; with his loud voice, his quick gestures, he had the
appearance of an old cavalry officer. Although over fifty, his short
hair and thick moustache were as black as ink.

"Yes! It is I. Good day! Don't disturb yourselves."

He had sat down amid the family's exclamations. They turned back at
last to their chocolate.

"Have you anything to tell me?" asked M. Grgoire.

"No! nothing at all," Deneulin hastened to reply. "I came out on
horseback to rub off the rust a bit, and as I passed your door I
thought I would just look in."

Ccile questioned him about Jeanne and Lucie, his daughters. They
were perfectly well, the first was always at her painting, while the
other, the elder, was training her voice at the piano from morning till
night. And there was a slight quiver in his voice, a disquiet which he
concealed beneath bursts of gaiety.

M. Grgoire began again:

"And everything goes well at the pit?"

"Well, I am upset over this dirty crisis. Ah! we are paying for the
prosperous years! They have built too many workshops, put down too many
railways, invested too much capital with a view to a large return, and
today the money is asleep. They can't get any more to make the whole
thing work. Luckily things are not desperate; I shall get out of it
somehow."

Like his cousin he had inherited a denier in the Montsou mines. But
being an enterprising engineer, tormented by the desire for a royal
fortune, he had hastened to sell out when the denier had reached a
million. For some months he had been maturing a scheme. His wife
possessed, through an uncle, the little concession of Vandame, where
only two pits were open--Jean-Bart and Gaston-Marie--in an abandoned
state, and with such defective material that the output hardly covered
the cost. Now he was meditating the repair of Jean-Bart, the renewal
of the engine, and the enlargement of the shaft so as to facilitate
the descent, keeping Gaston-Marie only for exhaustion purposes. They
ought to be able to shovel up gold there, he said. The idea was sound.
Only the million had been spent over it, and this damnable industrial
crisis broke out at the moment when large profits would have shown that
he was right. Besides, he was a bad manager, with a rough kindness
towards his workmen, and since his wife's death he allowed himself to
be pillaged, and also gave the rein to his daughters, the elder of whom
talked of going on the stage, while the younger had already had three
landscapes refused at the Salon, both of them joyous amid the downfall,
and exhibiting in poverty their capacity for good household management.

"You see, Lon," he went on, in a hesitating voice, "you were wrong not
to sell out at the same time as I did; now everything is going down.
You run risk, and if you had confided your money to me you would have
seen what we should have done at Vandame in our mine!"

M. Grgoire finished his chocolate without haste. He replied peacefully:

"Never! You know that I don't want to speculate. I live quietly, and it
would be too foolish to worry my head over business affairs. And as for
Montsou, it may continue to go down, we shall always get our living out
of it. It doesn't do to be so diabolically greedy! Then, listen, it is
you who will bite your fingers one day, for Montsou will rise again and
Ccile's grandchildren will still get their white bread out of it."

Deneulin listened with a constrained smile.

"Then," he murmured, "if I were to ask you to put a hundred thousand
francs in my affair you would refuse?"

But seeing the Grgoires' disturbed faces he regretted having gone so
far; he put off his idea of a loan, reserving it until the case was
desperate.

"Oh! I have not got to that! it is a joke. Good heavens! Perhaps you
are right; the money that other people earn for you is the best to
fatten on."

They changed the conversation. Ccile spoke again of her cousins, whose
tastes interested, while at the same time they shocked her. Madame
Grgoire promised to take her daughter to see those dear little ones on
the first fine day. M. Grgoire, however, with a distracted air, did
not follow the conversation. He added aloud:

"If I were in your place I wouldn't persist any more; I would treat
with Montsou. They want it, and you will get your money back."

He alluded to an old hatred which existed between the concession
of Montsou and that of Vandame. In spite of the latter's slight
importance, its powerful neighbour was enraged at seeing, enclosed
within its own sixty-seven communes, this square league which did not
belong to it, and after having vainly tried to kill it had plotted to
buy it at a low price when in a failing condition. The war continued
without truce. Each party stopped its galleries at two hundred metres
from the other; it was a duel to the last drop of blood, although the
managers and engineers maintained polite relations with each other.

Deneulin's eyes had flamed up.

"Never!" he cried, in his turn. "Montsou shall never have Vandame as
long as I am alive. I dined on Thursday at Hennebeau's, and I saw
him fluttering around me. Last autumn, when the big men came to the
administration building, they made me all sorts of advances. Yes, yes,
I know them--those marquises, and dukes, and generals, and ministers!
Brigands who would take away even your shirt at the corner of a wood."

He could not cease. Besides, M. Grgoire did not defend the
administration of Montsou--the six stewards established by the treaty
of 1760, who governed the Company despotically, and the five survivors
of whom on every death chose the new member among the powerful and rich
shareholders. The opinion of the owner of Piolaine, with his reasonable
ideas, was that these gentlemen were sometimes rather immoderate in
their exaggerated love of money.

Mlanie had come to clear away the table. Outside the dogs were again
barking, and Honorine was going to the door, when Ccile, who was
stifled by heat and food, left the table.

"No, never mind! it must be for my lesson."

Deneulin had also risen. He watched the young girl go out, and asked,
smiling:

"Well! and the marriage with little Ngrel?"

"Nothing has been settled," said Madame Grgoire; "it is only an idea.
We must reflect."

"No doubt!" he went on, with a gay laugh. "I believe that the nephew
and the aunt-- What baffles me is that Madame Hennebeau should throw
herself so on Ccile's neck."

But M. Grgoire was indignant. So distinguished a lady, and fourteen
years older than the young man! It was monstrous; he did not like
joking on such subjects. Deneulin, still laughing, shook hands with him
and left.

"Not yet," said Ccile, coming back. "It is that woman with the two
children. You know, mamma, the miner's wife whom we met. Are they to
come in here?"

They hesitated. Were they very dirty? No, not very; and they would
leave their sabots in the porch. Already the father and mother had
stretched themselves out in the depths of their large easy-chairs. They
were digesting there. The fear of change of air decided them.

"Let them come in, Honorine."

Then Maheude and her little ones entered, frozen and hungry, seized
by fright on finding themselves in this room, which was so warm and
smelled so nicely of the brioche.




CHAPTER II


The room remained shut up and the shutters had allowed gradual streaks
of daylight to form a fan on the ceiling. The confined air stupefied
them so that they continued their night's slumber: Lnore and Henri in
each other's arms, Alzire with her head back, lying on her hump; while
Father Bonnemort, having the bed of Zacharie and Jeanlin to himself,
snored with open mouth. No sound came from the closet where Maheude had
gone to sleep again while suckling Estelle, her breast hanging to one
side, the child lying across her belly, stuffed with milk, overcome
also and stifling in the soft flesh of the bosom.

The clock below struck six. Along the front of the settlement one heard
the sound of doors, then the clatter of sabots along the pavements; the
screening women were going to the pit. And silence again fell until
seven o'clock. Then shutters were drawn back, yawns and coughs were
heard through the walls. For a long time a coffee-mill scraped, but no
one awoke in the room.

Suddenly a sound of blows and shouts, far away, made Alzire sit up. She
was conscious of the time, and ran barefooted to shake her mother.

"Mother, mother, it is late! you have to go out. Take care, you are
crushing Estelle."

And she saved the child, half-stifled beneath the enormous mass of the
breasts.

"Good gracious!" stammered Maheude, rubbing her eyes, "I'm so knocked
up I could sleep all day. Dress Lnore and Henri, I'll take them with
me; and you can take care of Estelle; I don't want to drag her along
for fear of hurting her, this dog's weather."

She hastily washed herself and put on an old blue skirt, her cleanest,
and a loose jacket of grey wool in which she had made two patches the
evening before.

"And the soup! Good gracious!" she muttered again.

When her mother had gone down, upsetting everything, Alzire went back
into the room taking with her Estelle, who had begun screaming. But
she was used to the little one's rages; at eight she had all a woman's
tender cunning in soothing and amusing her. She gently placed her in
her still warm bed, and put her to sleep again, giving her a finger
to suck. It was time, for now another disturbance broke out, and she
had to make peace between Lnore and Henri, who at last awoke. These
children could never get on together; it was only when they were asleep
that they put their arms round one another's necks. The girl, who was
six years old, as soon as she was awake set on the boy, her junior
by two years, who received her blows without returning them. Both of
them had the same kind of head, which was too large for them, as if
blown out, with disorderly yellow hair. Alzire had to pull her sister
by the legs, threatening to take the skin off her bottom. Then there
was stamping over the washing, and over every garment that she put
on to them. The shutters remained closed so as not to disturb Father
Bonnemort's sleep. He went on snoring amid the children's frightful
clatter.

"It's ready. Are you coming, up there?" shouted Maheude.

She had put back the blinds, and stirred up the fire, adding some coal
to it. Her hope was that the old man had not swallowed all the soup.
But she found the saucepan dry, and cooked a handful of vermicelli
which she had been keeping for three days in reserve. They could
swallow it with water, without butter, as there could not be any
remaining from the day before, and she was surprised to find that
Catherine in preparing the bricks had performed the miracle of leaving
a piece as large as a nut. But this time the cupboard was indeed empty:
nothing, not a crust, not an odd fragment, not a bone to gnaw. What was
to become of them if Maigrat persisted in cutting short their credit,
and if the Piolaine people would not give them the five francs? When
the men and the girl returned from the pit they would want to eat, for
unfortunately it had not yet been found out how to live without eating.

"Come down, will you?" she cried out, getting angry. "I ought to be
gone by this!"

When Alzire and the children were there she divided the vermicelli in
three small portions. She herself was not hungry, she said. Although
Catherine had already poured water on the coffee-dregs of the day
before, she did so over again, and swallowed two large glasses of
coffee so weak that it looked like rusty water. That would keep her up
all the same.

"Listen!" she repeated to Alzire. "You must let your grandfather sleep;
you must watch that Estelle does not knock her head; and if she wakes,
or if she howls too much, here! take this bit of sugar and melt it and
give it her in spoonfuls. I know that you are sensible and won't eat it
yourself."

"And school, mother?"

"School! well, that must be left for another day: I want you."

"And the soup? would you like me to make it if you come back late?"

"Soup, soup: no, wait till I come."

Alzire, with the precocious intelligence of a little invalid girl,
could make soup very well. She must have understood, for she did not
insist. Now the whole settlement was awake, bands of children were
going to school, and one heard the trailing noise of their clogs. Eight
o'clock struck, and a growing murmur of chatter arose on the left,
among the Levaque people. The women were commencing their day around
the coffee-pots, with their fists on their hips, their tongues turning
without ceasing, like millstones. A faded head, with thick lips and
flattened nose, was pressed against a window-pane, calling out:

"Got some news. Stop a bit."

"No, no! later on," replied Maheude. "I have to go out."

And for fear of giving way to the offer of a glass of hot coffee she
pushed Lnore and Henri, and set out with them. Up above, Father
Bonnemort was still snoring with a rhythmic snore which rocked the
house.

Outside, Maheude was surprised to find that the wind was no longer
blowing. There had been a sudden thaw; the sky was earth-coloured,
the walls were sticky with greenish moisture, and the roads were
covered with pitch-like mud, a special kind of mud peculiar to the
coal country, as black as diluted soot, thick and tenacious enough
to pull off her sabots. Suddenly she boxed Lnore's ears, because
the little one amused herself by piling the mud on her clogs as on
the end of a shovel. On leaving the settlement she had gone along by
the pit-bank and followed the road of the canal, making a short cut
through broken-up paths, across rough country shut in by mossy palings.
Sheds succeeded one another, long workshop buildings, tall chimneys
spitting out soot, and soiling this ravaged suburb of an industrial
district. Behind a clump of poplars the old Rquillart pit exhibited
its crumbling steeple, of which the large skeleton alone stood upright.
And turning to the right, Maheude found herself on the high road.

"Stop, stop, dirty pig! I'll teach you to make mincemeat."

Now it was Henri, who had taken a handful of mud and was moulding it.
The two children had their ears impartially boxed, and were brought
into good order, looking out of the corner of their eyes at the mud
pies they had made. They draggled along, already exhausted by their
efforts to unstick their shoes at every step.

On the Marchiennes side the road unrolled its two leagues of pavement,
which stretched straight as a ribbon soaked in cart grease between
the reddish fields. But on the other side it went winding down
through Montsou, which was built on the slope of a large undulation
in the plain. These roads in the Nord, drawn like a string between
manufacturing towns, with their slight curves, their slow ascents,
gradually get lined with houses and tend to make the department one
laborious city. The little brick houses, daubed over to enliven the
climate, some yellow, others blue, others black--the last, no doubt,
in order to reach at once their final shade--went serpentining down to
right and to left to the bottom of the slope. A few large two-storied
villas, the dwellings of the heads of the workshops, made gaps in the
serried line of narrow facades. A church, also of brick, looked like a
new model of a large furnace, with its square tower already stained by
the floating coal dust. And amid the sugar works, the rope works, and
the flour mills, there stood out ballrooms, restaurants, and beershops,
which were so numerous that to every thousand houses there were more
than five hundred inns.

As she approached the Company's Yards, a vast series of storehouses and
workshops, Maheude decided to take Henri and Lnore by the hand, one on
the right, the other on the left. Beyond was situated the house of the
director, M. Hennebeau, a sort of vast chalet, separated from the road
by a grating, and then a garden in which some lean trees vegetated.
Just then, a carriage had stopped before the door and a gentleman
with decorations and a lady in a fur cloak alighted: visitors just
arrived from Paris at the Marchiennes station, for Madame Hennebeau,
who appeared in the shadow of the porch, was uttering exclamations of
surprise and joy.

"Come along, then, dawdlers!" growled Maheude, pulling the two little
ones, who were standing in the mud.

When she arrived at Maigrat's, she was quite excited. Maigrat lived
close to the manager; only a wall separated the latter's ground from
his own small house, and he had there a warehouse, a long building
which opened on to the road as a shop without a front. He kept
everything there, grocery, cooked meats, fruit, and sold bread, beer,
and saucepans. Formerly an overseer at the Voreux, he had started with
a small canteen; then, thanks to the protection of his superiors, his
business had enlarged, gradually killing the Montsou retail trade. He
centralized merchandise, and the considerable custom of the settlements
enabled him to sell more cheaply and to give longer credit. Besides, he
had remained in the Company's hands, and they had built his small house
and his shop.

"Here I am again, Monsieur Maigrat," said Maheude humbly, finding him
standing in front of his door.

He looked at her without replying. He was a stout, cold, polite man,
and he prided himself on never changing his mind.

"Now you won't send me away again, like yesterday. We must have bread
from now to Saturday. Sure enough, we owe you sixty francs these two
years."

She explained in short, painful phrases. It was an old debt contracted
during the last strike. Twenty times over they had promised to settle
it, but they had not been able; they could not even give him forty sous
a fortnight. And then a misfortune had happened two days before; she
had been obliged to pay twenty francs to a shoemaker who threatened to
seize their things. And that was why they were without a sou. Otherwise
they would have been able to go on until Saturday, like the others.

Maigrat, with protruded belly and folded arms, shook his head at every
supplication.

"Only two loaves, Monsieur Maigrat. I am reasonable, I don't ask for
coffee. Only two three-pound loaves a day."

"No," he shouted at last, at the top of his voice.

His wife had appeared, a pitiful creature who passed all her days
over a ledger, without even daring to lift her head. She moved away,
frightened at seeing this unfortunate woman turning her ardent,
beseeching eyes towards her. It was said that she yielded the conjugal
bed to the putters among the customers. It was a known fact that when
a miner wished to prolong his credit, he had only to send his daughter
or his wife, plain or pretty, it mattered not, provided they were
complaisant.

Maheude, still imploring Maigrat with her look, felt herself
uncomfortable under the pale keenness of his small eyes, which seemed
to undress her. It made her angry; she would have understood before she
had had seven children, when she was young. And she went off, violently
dragging Lnore and Henri who were occupied in picking up nut-shells
from the gutter where they were making investigations.

"This won't bring you luck, Monsieur Maigrat, remember!"

Now there only remained the Piolaine people. If these would not throw
her a five-franc piece she might as well lie down and die. She had
taken the Joiselle road on the left. The administration building was
there at the corner of the road, a veritable brick palace, where
the great people from Paris, princes and generals and members of
the Government, came every autumn to give large dinners. As she
walked she was already spending the five francs, first bread, then
coffee, afterwards a quarter of butter, a bushel of potatoes for the
morning soup and the evening stew; finally, perhaps, a bit of pig's
chitterlings, for the father needed meat.

The Cur of Montsou, Abb Joire, was passing, holding up his cassock,
with the delicate air of a fat, well-nourished cat afraid of wetting
its fur. He was a mild man who pretended not to interest himself in
anything, so as not to vex either the workers or the masters.

"Good day, Monsieur le Cur."

Without stopping he smiled at the children, and left her planted in
the middle of the road. She was not religious, but she had suddenly
imagined that this priest would give her something.

And the journey began again through the black, sticky mud. There were
still two kilometres to walk, and the little ones dragged behind more
than ever, for they were frightened, and no longer amused themselves.
To right and to left of the path the same vague landscape unrolled,
enclosed within mossy palings, the same factory buildings, dirty with
smoke, bristling with tall chimneys. Then the flat land was spread
out in immense open fields, like an ocean of brown clods, without a
tree-trunk, as far as the purplish line of the forest of Vandame.

"Carry me, mother."

She carried them one after the other. Puddles made holes in the
pathway, and she pulled up her clothes, fearful of arriving too dirty.
Three times she nearly fell, so sticky was that confounded pavement.
And as they at last arrived before the porch, two enormous dogs threw
themselves upon them, barking so loudly that the little ones yelled
with terror. The coachman was obliged to take a whip to them.

"Leave your sabots, and come in," repeated Honorine. In the dining-room
the mother and children stood motionless, dazed by the sudden heat, and
very constrained beneath the gaze of this old lady and gentleman, who
were stretched out in their easy-chairs.

"Ccile," said the old lady, "fulfil your little duties."

The Grgoires charged Ccile with their charities. It was part of their
idea of a good education. One must be charitable. They said themselves
that their house was the house of God. Besides, they flattered
themselves that they performed their charity with intelligence, and
they were exercised by a constant fear lest they should be deceived,
and so encourage vice. So they never gave money, never! Not ten sous,
not two sous, for it is a well-known fact that as soon as a poor man
gets two sous he drinks them. Their alms were, therefore, always in
kind, especially in warm clothing, distributed during the winter to
needy children.

"Oh! the poor dears!" exclaimed Ccile, '"how pale they are from the
cold! Honorine, go and look for the parcel in the cupboard."

The servants were also gazing at these miserable creatures with the
pity and vague uneasiness of girls who are in no difficulty about their
own dinners. While the housemaid went upstairs, the cook forgot her
duties, leaving the rest of the brioche on the table, and stood there
swinging her empty hands.

"I still have two woollen dresses and some comforters," Ccile went on;
"you will see how warm they will be, the poor dears!"

Then Maheude found her tongue, and stammered:

"Thank you so much, mademoiselle. You are all too good."

Tears had filled her eyes, she thought herself sure of the five francs,
and was only preoccupied by the way in which she would ask for them if
they were not offered to her. The housemaid did not reappear, and there
was a moment of embarrassed silence. From their mother's skirts the
little ones opened their eyes wide and gazed at the brioche.

"You only have these two?" asked Madame Grgoire, in order to break the
silence.

"Oh, madame! I have seven."

M. Grgoire, who had gone back to his newspaper, sat up indignantly.

"Seven children! But why? good God!"

"It is imprudent," murmured the old lady.

Maheude made a vague gesture of apology. What would you have? One
doesn't think about it at all, they come quite naturally. And then,
when they grow up they bring something in, and that makes the household
go. Take their case, they could get on, if it was not for the
grandfather who was getting quite stiff, and if it was not that among
the lot only two of her sons and her eldest daughter were old enough
to go down into the pit. It was necessary, all the same, to feed the
little ones who brought nothing in.

"Then," said Madame Grgoire, "you have worked for a long time at the
mines?"

A silent laugh lit up Maheude's pale face.

"Ah, yes! ah, yes! I went down till I was twenty. The doctor said that
I should stay down for good after I had been confined the second time,
because it seems that made something go wrong in my inside. Besides,
then I got married, and I had enough to do in the house. But on my
husband's side, you see, they have been down there for ages. It goes
up from grandfather to grandfather, one doesn't know how far back,
quite to the beginning when they first took the pick down there at
Rquillart."

M. Grgoire thoughtfully contemplated this woman and these pitiful
children, with their waxy flesh, their discoloured hair, the
degeneration which stunted them, gnawed by anaemia, and with the
melancholy ugliness of starvelings. There was silence again, and one
only heard the burning coal as it gave out a jet of gas. The moist
room had that heavy air of comfort in which our middle-class nooks of
happiness slumber.

"What is she doing, then?" exclaimed Ccile impatiently. "Mlanie, go
up and tell her that the parcel is at the bottom of the cupboard, on
the left."

In the meanwhile, M. Grgoire repeated aloud the reflections inspired
by the sight of these starving ones.

"There is evil in this world, it is quite true; but, my good woman,
it must also be said that workpeople are never prudent. Thus, instead
of putting aside a few sous like our peasants, miners drink, get into
debt, and end by not having enough to support their families."

"Monsieur is right," replied Maheude sturdily. "They don't always keep
to the right path. That's what I'm always saying to the ne'er-do-wells
when they complain. Now, I have been lucky; my husband doesn't drink.
All the same, on feast Sundays he sometimes takes a drop too much; but
it never goes farther. It is all the nicer of him, since before our
marriage he drank like a hog, begging your pardon. And yet, you know,
it doesn't help us much that he is so sensible. There are days like
to-day when you might turn out all the drawers in the house and not
find a farthing."

She wished to suggest to them the idea of the five-franc piece, and
went on in her low voice, explaining the fatal debt, small at first,
then large and overwhelming. They paid regularly for many fortnights.
But one day they got behind, and then it was all up. They could never
catch up again. The gulf widened, and the men became disgusted with
work which did not even allow them to pay their way. Do what they
could, there was nothing but difficulties until death. Besides, it must
be understood that a collier needed a glass to wash away the dust.
It began there, and then he was always in the inn when worries came.
Without complaining of any one it might be that the workmen did not
earn as much as they ought to.

"I thought," said Madame Grgoire, "that the Company gave you lodging
and firing?"

Maheude glanced sideways at the flaming coal in the fireplace.

"Yes, yes, they give us coal, not very grand, but it burns. As to
lodging, it only costs six francs a month; that sounds like nothing,
but it is often pretty hard to pay. To-day they might cut me up into
bits without getting two sous out of me. Where there's nothing, there's
nothing."

The lady and gentleman were silent, softly stretched out, and gradually
wearied and disquieted by the exhibition of this wretchedness. She
feared she had wounded them, and added, with the stolid and just air of
a practical woman:

"Oh! I didn't want to complain. Things are like this, and one has to
put up with them; all the more that it's no good struggling, perhaps
we shouldn't change anything. The best is, is it not, to try and live
honestly in the place in which the good God has put us?"

M. Grgoire approved this emphatically.

"With such sentiments, my good woman, one is above misfortune."

Honorine and Mlanie at last brought the parcel.

Ccile unfastened it and took out the two dresses. She added
comforters, even stockings and mittens. They would all fit beautifully;
she hastened and made the servants wrap up the chosen garments; for her
music mistress had just arrived; and she pushed the mother and children
towards the door.

"We are very short," stammered Maheude; "if we only had a five-franc
piece--"

The phrase was stifled, for the Maheus were proud and never begged.
Ccile looked uneasily at her father; but the latter refused
decisively, with an air of duty.

"No, it is not our custom. We cannot do it."

Then the young girl, moved by the mother's overwhelmed face, wished to
do all she could for the children. They were still looking fixedly at
the brioche; she cut it in two and gave it to them.

"Here! this is for you."

Then, taking the pieces back, she asked for an old newspaper:

"Wait, you must share with your brothers and sisters."

And beneath the tender gaze of her parents she finally pushed them out
of the room. The poor starving urchins went off, holding the brioche
respectfully in their benumbed little hands.

Maheude dragged her children along the road, seeing neither the desert
fields, nor the black mud, nor the great livid sky. As she passed
through Montsou she resolutely entered Maigrat's shop, and begged so
persistently that at last she carried away two loaves, coffee, butter,
and even her five-franc piece, for the man also lent money by the week.
It was not her that he wanted, it was Catherine; she understood that
when he advised her to send her daughter for provisions. They would see
about that. Catherine would box his ears if he came too close under her
nose.




CHAPTER III


Eleven o'clock struck at the little church in the Deux-Cent-Quarante
settlement, a brick chapel to which Abb Joire came to say mass
on Sundays. In the school beside it, also of brick, one heard the
faltering voices of the children, in spite of windows closed against
the outside cold. The wide passages, divided into little gardens,
back to back, between the four large blocks of uniform houses, were
deserted; and these gardens, devastated by the winter, exhibited
the destitution of their marly soil, lumped and spotted by the last
vegetables. They were making soup, chimneys were smoking, a woman
appeared at distant intervals along the fronts, opened a door and
disappeared. From one end to the other, on the pavement, the pipes
dripped into tubs, although it was no longer raining, so charged was
this grey sky with moistness. And the village, built altogether in the
midst of the vast plain, and edged by its black roads as by a mourning
border, had no touch of joyousness about it save the regular bands of
its red tiles, constantly washed by showers.

When Maheude returned, she went out of her way to buy potatoes from
an overseer's wife whose crop was not yet exhausted. Behind a curtain
of sickly poplars, the only trees in these flat regions, was a group
of isolated buildings, houses placed four together, and surrounded
by their gardens. As the Company reserved this new experiment for
the captains, the workpeople called this corner of the hamlet the
settlement of the Bas-de-Soie, just as they called their own settlement
Paie-tes-Dettes, in good-humoured irony of their wretchedness.

"Eh! Here we are," said Maheude, laden with parcels, pushing in Lnore
and Henri, covered with mud and quite tired out.

In front of the fire Estelle was screaming, cradled in Alzire's arms.
The latter, having no more sugar and not knowing how to soothe her, had
decided to pretend to give her the breast. This ruse often succeeded.
But this time it was in vain for her to open her dress, and to press
the mouth against the lean breast of an eight-year-old invalid; the
child was enraged at biting the skin and drawing nothing.

"Pass her to me," cried the mother as soon as she found herself free;
"she won't let us say a word."

When she had taken from her bodice a breast as heavy as a leather
bottle, to the neck of which the brawler hung, suddenly silent, they
were at last able to talk. Otherwise everything was going on well; the
little housekeeper had kept up the fire and had swept and arranged the
room. And in the silence they heard upstairs the grandfather's snoring,
the same rhythmic snoring which had not stopped for a moment.

"What a lot of things!" murmured Alzire, smiling at the provisions. "If
you like, mother, I'll make the soup."

The table was encumbered: a parcel of clothes, two loaves, potatoes,
butter, coffee, chicory, and half a pound of pig's chitterlings.

"Oh! the soup!" said Maheude with an air of fatigue. "We must gather
some sorrel and pull up some leeks. No! I will make some for the men
afterwards. Put some potatoes on to boil; we'll eat them with a little
butter and some coffee, eh? Don't forget the coffee!"

But suddenly she thought of the brioche. She looked at the empty hands
of Lnore and Henri who were fighting on the floor, already rested and
lively. These gluttons had slyly eaten the brioche on the road. She
boxed their ears, while Alzire, who was putting the saucepan on the
fire, tried to appease her.

"Let them be, mother. If the brioche was for me, you know I don't mind
a bit. They were hungry, walking so far."

Midday struck; they heard the clogs of the children coming out of
school. The potatoes were cooked, and the coffee, thickened by a good
half of chicory, was passing through the percolator with a singing
noise of large drops. One corner of the table was free; but the mother
only was eating there. The three children were satisfied with their
knees; and all the time the little boy with silent voracity looked,
without saying anything, at the chitterlings, excited by the greasy
paper.

Maheude was drinking her coffee in little sips, with her hands round
the glass to warm them, when Father Bonnemort came down. Usually
he rose late, and his breakfast waited for him on the fire. But
to-day he began to grumble because there was no soup. Then, when his
daughter-in-law said to him that one cannot always do what one likes,
he ate his potatoes in silence. From time to time he got up to spit in
the ashes for cleanliness, and, settled in his chair, he rolled his
food round in his mouth, with lowered head and dull eyes.

"Ah! I forgot, mother," said Alzire. "The neighbour came--"

Her mother interrupted her.

"She bothers me!"

There was a deep rancour against the Levaque woman, who had pleaded
poverty the day before to avoid lending her anything; while she knew
that she was just then in comfort, since her lodger, Bouteloup, had
paid his fortnight in advance. In the settlement they did not usually
lend from household to household.

"Here! you remind me," said Maheude. "Wrap up a millful of coffee. I
will take it to Pierronne; I owe it her from the day before yesterday."

And when her daughter had prepared the packet she added that she
would come back immediately to put the men's soup on the fire. Then
she went out with Estelle in her arms, leaving old Bonnemort to chew
his potatoes leisurely, while Lnore and Henri fought for the fallen
parings.

Instead of going round, Maheude went straight across through the
gardens, for fear lest Levaque's wife should call her. Her garden was
just next to that of the Pierrons, and in the dilapidated trellis-work
which separated them there was a hole through which they fraternized.
The common well was there, serving four households. Beside it, behind
a clump of feeble lilacs, was situated the shed, a low building full
of old tools, in which were brought up the rabbits which were eaten on
feast days. One o'clock struck; it was the hour for coffee, and not a
soul was to be seen at the doors or windows. Only a workman belonging
to the earth-cutting, waiting the hour for descent, was digging up his
patch of vegetable ground without raising his head. But as Maheude
arrived opposite the other block of buildings, she was surprised to see
a gentleman and two ladies in front of the church. She stopped a moment
and recognized them; it was Madame Hennebeau bringing her guests,
the decorated gentleman and the lady in the fur mantle, to see the
settlement.

"Oh! why did you take this trouble?" exclaimed Pierronne, when Maheude
had returned the coffee. "There was no hurry."

She was twenty-eight, and was considered the beauty of the settlement,
dark, with a low forehead, large eyes, straight mouth, and coquettish
as well; with the neatness of a cat, and with a good figure, for she
had had no children. Her mother, Brul, the widow of a pikeman who
died in the mine, after having sent her daughter to work in a factory,
swearing that she should never marry a collier, had never ceased to be
angry since she had married, somewhat late, Pierron, a widower with a
girl of eight. However, the household lived very happily, in the midst
of chatter, of scandals which circulated concerning the husband's
complaisance and the wife's lovers. No debts, meat twice a week, a
house kept so clean that one could see oneself in the saucepans. As an
additional piece of luck, thanks to favours, the Company had authorized
her to sell bon-bons and biscuits, jars of which she exhibited, on two
boards, behind the window-panes. This was six or seven sous profit a
day, and sometimes twelve on Sundays. The only drawback to all this
happiness was Mother Brul, who screamed with all the rage of an old
revolutionary, having to avenge the death of her man on the masters,
and little Lydie, who pocketed, in the shape of frequent blows, the
passions of the family.

"How big she is already!" said Pierronne, simpering at Estelle.

"Oh! the trouble that it gives! Don't talk of it!" said Maheude. "You
are lucky not to have any. At least you can keep clean."

Although everything was in order in her house, and she scrubbed every
Saturday, she glanced with a jealous housekeeper's eye over this clean
room, in which there was even a certain coquetry, gilt vases on the
sideboard, a mirror, three framed prints.

Pierronne was about to drink her coffee alone, all her people being at
the pit.

"You'll have a glass with me?" she said.

"No, thanks; I've just swallowed mine."

"What does that matter?"

In fact, it mattered nothing. And both began drinking slowly. Between
the jars of biscuits and bon-bons their eyes rested on the opposite
houses, of which the little curtains in the windows formed a row,
revealing by their greater or less whiteness the virtues of the
housekeepers. Those of the Levaques were very dirty, veritable kitchen
clouts, which seemed to have wiped the bottoms of the saucepans.

"How can they live in such dirt?" murmured Pierronne.

Then Maheude began and did not stop. Ah! if she had had a lodger like
that Bouteloup she would have made the household go. When one knew how
to do it, a lodger was an excellent thing. Only one ought not to sleep
with him. And then the husband had taken to drink, beat his wife, and
ran after the singers at the Montsou caf-concerts.

Pierronne assumed an air of profound disgust. These singers gave all
sort of diseases. There was one at Joiselle who had infected a whole
pit.

"What surprises me is that you let your son go with their girl."

"Ah, yes! but just stop it then! Their garden is next to ours. Zacharie
was always there in summer with Philomne behind the lilacs, and they
didn't put themselves out on the shed; one couldn't draw water at the
well without surprising them."

It was the usual history of the promiscuities of the settlement; boys
and girls became corrupted together, throwing themselves on their
backsides, as they said, on the low, sloping roof of the shed when
twilight came on. All the putters got their first child there when they
did not take the trouble to go to Rquillart or into the cornfields. It
was of no consequence; they married afterwards, only the mothers were
angry when their lads began too soon, for a lad who married no longer
brought anything into the family.

"In your place I would have done with it," said Pierronne, sensibly.
"Your Zacharie has already filled her twice, and they will go on and
get spliced. Anyhow, the money is gone."

Maheude was furious and raised her hands.

"Listen to this: I will curse them if they get spliced. Doesn't
Zacharie owe us any respect? He has cost us something, hasn't he? Very
well. He must return it before getting a wife to hang on him. What will
become of us, eh, if our children begin at once to work for others?
Might as well die!"

However, she grew calm.

"I'm speaking in a general way; we shall see later. It is fine and
strong, your coffee; you make it proper."

And after a quarter of an hour spent over other stories, she ran off,
exclaiming that the men's soup was not yet made. Outside, the children
were going back to school; a few women were showing themselves at
their doors, looking at Madame Hennebeau, who, with lifted finger, was
explaining the settlement to her guests. This visit began to stir up
the village. The earth-cutting man stopped digging for a moment, and
two disturbed fowls took fright in the gardens.

As Maheude returned, she ran against the Levaque woman who had come out
to stop Dr. Vanderhaghen, a doctor of the Company, a small hurried man,
overwhelmed by work, who gave his advice as he walked.

"Sir," she said, "I can't sleep; I feel ill everywhere. I must tell you
about it."

He spoke to them all familiarly, and replied without stopping:

"Just leave me alone; you drink too much coffee."

"And my husband, sir," said Maheude in her turn, "you must come and see
him. He always has those pains in his legs."

"It is you who take too much out of him. Just leave me alone!"

The two women were left to gaze at the doctor's retreating back.

"Come in, then," said the Levaque woman, when she had exchanged a
despairing shrug with her neighbour. "You know, there is something new.
And you will take a little coffee. It is quite fresh."

Maheude refused, but without energy. Well! a drop, at all events, not
to disoblige. And she entered.

The room was black with dirt, the floor and the walls spotted with
grease, the sideboard and the table sticky with filth; and the stink
of a badly kept house took you by the throat. Near the fire, with his
elbows on the table and his nose in his plate, Bouteloup, a broad stout
placid man, still young for thirty-five, was finishing the remains
of his boiled beef, while standing in front of him, little Achille,
Philomne's first-born, who was already in his third year, was looking
at him in the silent, supplicating way of a gluttonous animal. The
lodger, very kind behind his big brown beard, from time to time stuffed
a piece of meat into his mouth.

"Wait till I sugar it," said the Levaque woman, putting some brown
sugar beforehand into the coffee-pot.

Six years older than he was, she was hideous and worn out, with her
bosom hanging on her belly, and her belly on her thighs, with a
flattened muzzle, and greyish hair always uncombed. He had taken her
naturally, without choosing, the same as he did his soup in which he
found hairs, or his bed of which the sheets lasted for three months.
She was part of the lodging; the husband liked repeating that good
reckonings make good friends.

"I was going to tell you," she went on, "that Pierronne was seen
yesterday prowling about on the Bas-de-Soie side. The gentleman you
know of was waiting for her behind Rasseneur's, and they went off
together along the canal. Eh! that's nice, isn't it? A married woman!"

"Gracious!" said Maheude; "Pierron, before marrying her, used to give
the captain rabbits; now it costs him less to lend his wife."

Bouteloup began to laugh enormously, and threw a fragment of sauced
bread into Achille's mouth. The two women went on relieving themselves
with regard to Pierronne--a flirt, no prettier than any one else, but
always occupied in looking after every freckle of her skin, in washing
herself, and putting on pomade. Anyhow, it was the husband's affair,
if he liked that sort of thing. There were men so ambitious that they
would wipe the masters' behinds to hear them say thank you. And they
were only interrupted by the arrival of a neighbour bringing in a
little urchin of nine months, Dsire, Philomne's youngest; Philomne,
taking her breakfast at the screening-shed, had arranged that they
should bring her little one down there, where she suckled it, seated
for a moment in the coal.

"I can't leave mine for a moment, she screams directly," said Maheude,
looking at Estelle, who was asleep in her arms.

But she did not succeed in avoiding the domestic affair which she had
read in the other's eyes.

"I say, now we ought to get that settled."

At first the two mothers, without need for talking about it, had agreed
not to conclude the marriage. If Zacharie's mother wished to get her
son's wages as long as possible, Philomne's mother was enraged at the
idea of abandoning her daughter's wages. There was no hurry; the second
mother had even preferred to keep the little one, as long as there was
only one; but when it began to grow and eat and another one came, she
found that she was losing, and furiously pushed on the marriage, like a
woman who does not care to throw away her money.

"Zacharie has drawn his lot," she went on, "and there's nothing in the
way. When shall it be?"

"Wait till the fine weather," replied Maheude, constrainedly. "They
are a nuisance, these affairs! As if they couldn't wait to be married
before going together! My word! I would strangle Catherine if I knew
that she had done that."

The other woman shrugged her shoulders.

"Let be! she'll do like the others."

Bouteloup, with the tranquillity of a man who is at home, searched
about on the dresser for bread. Vegetables for Levaque's soup, potatoes
and leeks, lay about on a corner of the table, half-peeled, taken up
and dropped a dozen times in the midst of continual gossiping. The
woman was about to go on with them again when she dropped them anew and
planted herself before the window.

"What's that there? Why, there's Madame Hennebeau with some people.
They are going into Pierronne's."

At once both of them started again on the subject of Pierronne. Oh!
whenever the Company brought any visitors to the settlement they never
failed to go straight to her place, because it was clean. No doubt
they never told them stories about the head captain. One can afford to
be clean when one has lovers who earn three thousand francs, and are
lodged and warmed, without counting presents. If it was clean above it
was not clean underneath. And all the time that the visitors remained
opposite, they went on chattering.

"There, they are coming out," said the Levaque woman at last. "They are
going all around. Why, look, my dear--I believe they are going into
your place."

Maheude was seized with fear. Who knows whether Alzire had sponged over
the table? And her soup, also, which was not yet ready! She stammered a
good-day, and ran off home without a single glance aside.

But everything was bright. Alzire, very seriously, with a cloth in
front of her, had set about making the soup, seeing that her mother did
not return. She had pulled up the last leeks from the garden, gathered
the sorrel, and was just then cleaning the vegetables, while a large
kettle on the fire was heating the water for the men's baths when they
should return. Henri and Lnore were good for once, being absorbed in
tearing up an old almanac. Father Bonnemort was smoking his pipe in
silence. As Maheude was getting her breath Madame Hennebeau knocked.

"You will allow me, will you not, my good woman?"

Tall and fair, a little heavy in her superb maturity of forty
years, she smiled with an effort of affability, without showing too
prominently her fear of soiling her bronze silk dress and black velvet
mantle.

"Come in, come in," she said to her guests. "We are not disturbing
any one. Now, isn't this clean again! And this good woman has seven
children! All our households are like this. I ought to explain to you
that the Company rents them the house at six francs a month. A large
room on the ground floor, two rooms above, a cellar, and a garden."

The decorated gentleman and the lady in the fur cloak, arrived that
morning by train from Paris, opened their eyes vaguely, exhibiting on
their faces their astonishment at all these new things which took them
out of their element.

"And a garden!" repeated the lady. "One could live here! It is
charming!"

"We give them more coal than they can burn," went on Madame Hennebeau.
"A doctor visits them twice a week; and when they are old they receive
pensions, although nothing is held back from their wages."

"A Thebaid! a real land of milk and honey!" murmured the gentleman in
delight.

Maheude had hastened to offer chairs. The ladies refused. Madame
Hennebeau was already getting tired, happy for a moment to amuse
herself in the weariness of her exile by playing the part of exhibiting
the beasts, but immediately disgusted by the sickly odour of
wretchedness, in spite of the special cleanliness of the houses into
which she ventured. Besides, she was only repeating odd phrases which
she had overheard, without ever troubling herself further about this
race of workpeople who were labouring and suffering beside her.

"What beautiful children!" murmured the lady, who thought them hideous,
with their large heads beneath their bushy, straw-coloured hair.

And Maheude had to tell their ages; they also asked her questions about
Estelle, out of politeness. Father Bonnemort respectfully took his pipe
out of his mouth; but he was not the less a subject of uneasiness, so
worn out by his forty years underground, with his stiff limbs, deformed
body, and earthy face; and as a violent spasm of coughing took him
he preferred to go and spit outside, with the idea that his black
expectoration would make people uncomfortable.

Alzire received all the compliments. What an excellent little
housekeeper, with her cloth! They congratulated the mother on having a
little daughter so sensible for her age. And none spoke of the hump,
though looks of uneasy compassion were constantly turned towards the
poor little invalid.

"Now!" concluded Madame Hennebeau, "if they ask you about our
settlements at Paris you will know what to reply. Never more noise than
this, patriarchal manners, all happy and well off as you see, a place
where you might come to recruit a little, on account of the good air
and the tranquillity."

"It is marvellous, marvellous!" exclaimed the gentleman, in a final
outburst of enthusiasm.

They left with that enchanted air with which people leave a booth in
a fair, and Maheude, who accompanied them, remained on the threshold
while they went away slowly, talking very loudly. The streets were
full of people, and they had to pass through several groups of women,
attracted by the news of their visit, which was hawked from house to
house.

Just then, Levaque, in front of her door, had stopped Pierronne, who
was drawn by curiosity. Both of them affected a painful surprise. What
now? Were these people going to bed at the Maheus'? But it was not so
very delightful a place.

"Always without a sou, with all that they earn! Lord! when people have
vices!"

"I have just heard that she went this morning to beg at Piolaine, and
Maigrat, who had refused them bread, has given them something. We know
how Maigrat pays himself!"

"On her? Oh, no! that would need some courage. It's Catherine that he's
after."

"Why, didn't she have the cheek to say just now that she would strangle
Catherine if she were to come to that? As if big Chaval for ever so
long had not put her backside on the shed!"

"Hush! here they are!"

Then Levaque and Pierronne, with a peaceful air and without impolite
curiosity, contented themselves with watching the visitors out of the
corners of their eyes. Then by a gesture they quickly called Maheude,
who was still carrying Estelle in her arms. And all three, motionless,
watched the well-clad backs of Madame Hennebeau and her guests slowly
disappear. When they were some thirty paces off, the gossiping
recommenced with redoubled vigour.

"They carry plenty of money on their skins; worth more than themselves,
perhaps."

"Ah, sure! I don't know the other, but the one that belongs here, I
wouldn't give four sous for her, big as she is. They do tell stories--"

"Eh? What stories?"

"Why, she has men! First, the engineer."

"That lean, little creature! Oh, he's too small! She would lose him in
the sheets."

"What does that matter, if it amuses her? I don't trust a woman who
puts on such proud airs and never seems to be pleased where she is.
Just look how she wags her rump, as if she felt contempt for us all. Is
that nice?"

The visitors went along at the same slow pace, still talking, when a
carriage stopped in the road, before the church. A gentleman of about
forty-eight got out of it, dressed in a black frock-coat, and with a
very dark complexion and an authoritative, correct expression.

"The husband," murmured Levaque, lowering her voice, as if he could
hear her, seized by that hierarchical fear which the manager inspired
in his ten thousand workpeople. "It's true, though, that he has a
cuckold's head, that man."

Now the whole settlement was out of doors. The curiosity of the women
increased. The groups approached each other, and were melted into one
crowd; while bands of urchins, with unwiped noses and gaping mouths,
dawdled along the pavements. For a moment the schoolmaster's pale head
was also seen behind the school-house hedge. Among the gardens, the
man who was digging stood with one foot on his spade, and with rounded
eyes. And the murmur of gossiping gradually increased, with a sound of
rattles, like a gust of wind among dry leaves.

It was especially before the Levaques' door that the crowd was
thickest. Two women had come forward, then ten, then twenty. Pierronne
was prudently silent now that there were too many ears about. Maheude,
one of the more reasonable, also contented herself with looking on;
and to calm Estelle, who was awake and screaming, she had tranquilly
drawn out her suckling animal's breast, which hung swaying as if pulled
down by the continual running of its milk. When M. Hennebeau had
seated the ladies in the carriage, which went off in the direction of
Marchiennes, there was a final explosion of clattering voices, all the
women gesticulating and talking in each other's faces in the midst of a
tumult as of an ant-hill in revolution.

But three o'clock struck. The workers of the earth-cutting, Bouteloup
and the others, had set out. Suddenly around the church appeared
the first colliers returning from the pit with black faces and damp
garments, folding their arms and expanding their backs. Then there was
confusion among the women: they all began to run home with the terror
of housekeepers who had been led astray by too much coffee and too much
tattle, and one heard nothing more than this restless cry, pregnant
with quarrels:

"Good Lord, and my soup! and my soup which isn't ready!"




CHAPTER IV


When Maheu came in after having left tienne at Rasseneur's, he found
Catherine, Zacharie, and Jeanlin seated at the table finishing their
soup. On returning from the pit they were always so hungry that they
ate in their damp clothes, without even cleaning themselves; and no one
was waited for, the table was laid from morning to night; there was
always someone there swallowing his portion, according to the chances
of work.

As he entered the door Maheu saw the provisions. He said nothing,
but his uneasy face lighted up. All the morning the emptiness of the
cupboard, the thought of the house without coffee and without butter,
had been troubling him; the recollection came to him painfully while he
was hammering at the seam, stifled at the bottom of the cutting. What
would his wife do, and what would become of them if she were to return
with empty hands? And now, here was everything! She would tell him
about it later on. He laughed with satisfaction.

Catherine and Jeanlin had risen, and were taking their coffee standing;
while Zacharie, not filled with the soup, cut himself a large slice of
bread and covered it with butter. Although he saw the chitterlings on
a plate he did not touch them, for meat was for the father, when there
was only enough for one. All of them had washed down their soup with a
big bumper of fresh water, the good, clear drink of the fortnight's end.

"I have no beer," said Maheude, when the father had seated himself in
his turn. "I wanted to keep a little money. But if you would like some
the little one can go and fetch a pint."

He looked at her in astonishment. What! she had money, too!

"No, no," he said, "I've had a glass, it's all right."

And Maheu began to swallow by slow spoonfuls the paste of bread,
potatoes, leeks, and sorrel piled up in the bowl which served him as a
plate. Maheude, without putting Estelle down, helped Alzire to give him
all that he required, pushed near him the butter and the meat, and put
his coffee on the fire to keep it quite hot.

In the meanwhile, beside the fire, they began to wash themselves in
the half of a barrel transformed into a tub. Catherine, whose turn
came first, had filled it with warm water; and she undressed herself
tranquilly, took off her cap, her jacket, her breeches, and even her
chemise, habituated to this since the age of eight, having grown up
without seeing any harm in it. She only turned with her stomach to the
fire, then rubbed herself vigorously with black soap. No one looked
at her, even Lnore and Henri were no longer inquisitive to see how
she was made. When she was clean she went up the stairs quite naked,
leaving her damp chemise and other garments in a heap on the floor. But
a quarrel broke out between the two brothers: Jeanlin had hastened to
jump into the tub under the pretence that Zacharie was still eating;
and the latter hustled him, claiming his turn, and calling out that he
was polite enough to allow Catherine to wash herself first, but he did
not wish to have the rinsings of the young urchins, all the less since,
when Jeanlin had been in, it would do to fill the school ink-pots. They
ended by washing themselves together, also turning towards the fire,
and they even helped each other, rubbing one another's backs. Then,
like their sister, they disappeared up the staircase naked.

"What a slop they do make!" murmured Maheude, taking up their garments
from the floor to put them to dry. "Alzire, just sponge up a bit."

But a disturbance on the other side of the wall cut short her speech.
One heard a man's oaths, a woman's crying, a whole stampede of battle,
with hollow blows that sounded like the shock of an empty gourd.

"Levaque's wife is catching it," Maheu peacefully stated as he scraped
the bottom of his bowl with the spoon. "It's queer; Bouteloup made out
that the soup was ready."

"Ah, yes! ready," said Maheude. "I saw the vegetables on the table, not
even cleaned."

The cries redoubled, and there was a terrible push which shook the
wall, followed by complete silence. Then the miner, swallowing the last
spoonful, concluded, with an air of calm justice:

"If the soup is not ready, one can understand."

And after having drunk a glassful of water, he attacked the
chitterlings. He cut square pieces, stuck the point of his knife into
them and ate them on his bread without a fork. There was no talking
when the father was eating. He himself was hungry in silence; he did
not recognize the usual taste of Maigrat's provisions; this must come
from somewhere else; however, he put no question to his wife. He only
asked if the old man was still sleeping upstairs. No, the grandfather
had gone out for his usual walk. And there was silence again.

But the odour of the meat made Lnore and Henri lift up their heads
from the floor, where they were amusing themselves with making rivulets
with the spilt water. Both of them came and planted themselves near
their father, the little one in front. Their eyes followed each
morsel, full of hope when it set out from the plate and with an air of
consternation when it was engulfed in the mouth. At last the father
noticed the gluttonous desire which made their faces pale and their
lips moist.

"Have the children had any of it?" he asked.

And as his wife hesitated:

"You know I don't like injustice. It takes away my appetite when I see
them there, begging for bits."

"But they've had some of it," she exclaimed, angrily. "If you were to
listen to them you might give them your share and the others', too;
they would fill themselves till they burst. Isn't it true, Alzire, that
we have all had some?"

"Sure enough, mother," replied the little humpback, who under such
circumstances could tell lies with the self-possession of a grown-up
person.

Lnore and Henri stood motionless, shocked and rebellious at such
lying, when they themselves were whipped if they did not tell the
truth. Their little hearts began to swell, and they longed to protest,
and to say that they, at all events, were not there when the others had
some.

"Get along with you," said the mother, driving them to the other end
of the room. "You ought to be ashamed of being always in your father's
plate; and even if he was the only one to have any, doesn't he work,
while all you, a lot of good-for-nothings, can't do anything but spend!
Yes, and the more the bigger you are."

Maheu called them back. He seated Lnore on his left thigh, Henri on
the right; then he finished the chitterlings by playing at dinner
with them. He cut small pieces, and each had his share. The children
devoured with delight.

When he had finished, he said to his wife:

"No, don't give me my coffee. I'm going to wash first; and just give me
a hand to throw away this dirty water."

They took hold of the handles of the tub and emptied it into the gutter
before the door, when Jeanlin came down in dry garments, breeches and
a woollen blouse, too large for him, which were weary of fading on his
brother's back. Seeing him slinking out through the open door, his
mother stopped him.

"Where are you off to?"

"Over there."

"Over where? Listen to me. You go and gather a dandelion salad for this
evening. Eh, do you hear? If you don't bring a salad back you'll have
to deal with me."

"All right!"

Jeanlin set out with hands in his pockets, trailing his sabots and
slouching along, with his slender loins of a ten-year-old urchin, like
an old miner. In his turn, Zacharie came down, more carefully dressed,
his body covered by a black woollen knitted jacket with blue stripes.
His father called out to him not to return late; and he left, nodding
his head with his pipe between his teeth, without replying. Again the
tub was filled with warm water. Maheu was already slowly taking off his
jacket. At a look, Alzire led Lnore and Henri outside to play. The
father did not like washing _en famille_, as was practised in many
houses in the settlement. He blamed no one, however; he simply said
that it was good for the children to dabble together.

"What are you doing up there?" cried Maheude, up the staircase.

"I'm mending my dress that I tore yesterday," replied Catherine.

"All right. Don't come down, your father is washing."

Then Maheu and Maheude were left alone. The latter decided to place
Estelle on a chair, and by a miracle, finding herself near the fire the
child did not scream, but turned towards her parents the vague eyes of
a little creature without intelligence. He was crouching before the tub
quite naked, having first plunged his head into it, well rubbed with
that black soap the constant use of which discoloured and made yellow
the hair of the race. Afterwards he got into the water, lathered his
chest, belly, arms, and thighs, scraping them energetically with both
fists. His wife, standing by, watched him.

"Well, then," she began, "I saw your eyes when you came in. You were
bothered, eh? and it eased you, those provisions. Fancy! those Piolaine
people didn't give me a sou! Oh! they are kind enough; they have
dressed the little ones and I was ashamed to ask them, for it crosses
me to ask for things."

She interrupted herself a moment to wedge Estelle into the chair lest
she should tip over. The father continued to work away at his skin,
without hastening by a question this story which interested him,
patiently waiting for light.

"I must tell you that Maigrat had refused me, oh! straight! like one
kicks a dog out of doors. Guess if I was on a spree! They keep you
warm, woollen garments, but they don't put anything into your stomach,
eh!"

He lifted his head, still silent. Nothing at Piolaine, nothing at
Maigrat's: then where? But, as usual, she was pulling up her sleeves to
wash his back and those parts which he could not himself easily reach.
Besides, he liked her to soap him, to rub him everywhere till she
almost broke her wrists. She took soap and worked away at his shoulders
while he held himself stiff so as to resist the shock.

"Then I returned to Maigrat's, and said to him, ah, I said something to
him! And that it didn't do to have no heart, and that evil would happen
to him if there were any justice. That bothered him; he turned his eyes
and would like to have got away."

From the back she had got down to the buttocks and was pushing into the
folds, not leaving any part of the body without passing over it, making
him shine like her three saucepans on Saturdays after a big clean.
Only she began to sweat with this tremendous exertion of her arms, so
exhausted and out of breath that her words were choked.

"At last he called me an old nuisance. We shall have bread until
Saturday, and the best is that he has lent me five francs. I have got
butter, coffee, and chicory from him. I was even going to get the meat
and potatoes there, only I saw that he was grumbling. Seven sous for
the chitterlings, eighteen for the potatoes, and I've got three francs
seventy-five left for a ragout and a meat soup. Eh, I don't think I've
wasted my morning!"

Now she began to wipe him, plugging with a towel the parts that would
not dry. Feeling happy and without thinking of the future debt, he
burst out laughing and took her in his arms.

"Leave me alone, stupid! You are damp, and wetting me. Only I'm afraid
Maigrat has ideas----"

She was about to speak of Catherine, but she stopped. What was the good
of disturbing him? It would only lead to endless discussion.

"What ideas?" he asked.

"Why, ideas of robbing us. Catherine will have to examine the bill
carefully."

He took her in his arms again, and this time did not let her go.
The bath always finished in this way: she enlivened him by the hard
rubbing, and then by the towels which tickled the hairs of his arms
and chest. Besides, among all his mates of the settlement it was the
hour for stupidities, when more children were planted than were wanted.
At night all the family were about. He pushed her towards the table,
jesting like a worthy man who was enjoying the only good moment of the
day, calling that taking his dessert, and a dessert which cost him
nothing. She, with her loose figure and breast, struggled a little for
fun.

"You are stupid! My Lord! you are stupid! And there's Estelle looking
at us. Wait till I turn her head."

"Oh, bosh! at three months; as if she understood!"

When he got up Maheu simply put on a dry pair of breeches. He liked,
when he was clean and had taken his pleasure with his wife, to remain
naked for a while. On his white skin, the whiteness of an anaemic girl,
the scratches and gashes of the coal left tattoo-marks, grafts as the
miners called them; and he was proud of them, and exhibited his big
arms and broad chest shining like veined marble. In summer all the
miners could be seen in this condition at their doors. He even went
there for a moment now, in spite of the wet weather, and shouted out a
rough joke to a comrade, whose breast was also naked, on the other side
of the gardens. Others also appeared. And the children, trailing along
the pathways, raised their heads and also laughed with delight at all
this weary flesh of workers displayed in the open air.

While drinking his coffee, without yet putting on a shirt, Maheu
told his wife about the engineer's anger over the planking. He was
calm and unbent, and listened with a nod of approval to the sensible
advice of Maheude, who showed much common sense in such affairs. She
always repeated to him that nothing was gained by struggling against
the Company. She afterwards told him about Madame Hennebeau's visit.
Without saying so, both of them were proud of this.

"Can I come down yet?" asked Catherine, from the top of the staircase.

"Yes, yes; your father is drying himself."

The young girl had put on her Sunday dress, an old frock of rough blue
poplin, already faded and worn in the folds. She had on a very simple
bonnet of black tulle.

"Hallo! you're dressed. Where are you going to?"

"I'm going to Montsou to buy a ribbon for my bonnet. I've taken off the
old one; it was too dirty."

"Have you got money, then?"

"No! but Mouquette promised to lend me half a franc."

The mother let her go. But at the door she called her back.

"Here! don't go and buy that ribbon at Maigrat's. He will rob you, and
he will think that we are rolling in wealth."

The father, who was crouching down before the fire to dry his neck and
shoulders more quickly, contented himself with adding:

"Try not to dawdle about at night on the road."

In the afternoon, Maheu worked in his garden. Already he had sown
potatoes, beans, and peas; and he now set about replanting cabbage and
lettuce plants, which he had kept fresh from the night before. This bit
of garden furnished them with vegetables, except potatoes of which they
never had enough. He understood gardening very well, and could even
grow artichokes, which was treated as sheer display by the neighbours.
As he was preparing the bed, Levaque just then came out to smoke a
pipe in his own square, looking at the cos lettuces which Bouteloup
had planted in the morning; for without the lodger's energy in digging
nothing would have grown there but nettles. And a conversation arose
over the trellis. Levaque, refreshed and excited by thrashing his wife,
vainly tried to take Maheu off to Rasseneur's. Why, was he afraid of
a glass? They could have a game at skittles, lounge about for a while
with the mates, and then come back to dinner. That was the way of life
after leaving the pit. No doubt there was no harm in that, but Maheu
was obstinate; if he did not replant his lettuces they would be faded
by to-morrow. In reality he refused out of good sense, not wishing to
ask a farthing from his wife out of the change of the five-franc piece.

Five o'clock was striking when Pierronne came to know if it was with
Jeanlin that her Lydie had gone off. Levaque replied that it must be
something of that sort, for Bbert had also disappeared, and those
rascals always went prowling about together. When Maheu had quieted
them by speaking of the dandelion salad, he and his comrade set about
joking the young woman with the coarseness of good-natured devils.
She was angry, but did not go away, in reality tickled by the strong
words which made her scream with her hands to her sides. A lean woman
came to her aid, stammering with anger like a clucking hen. Others
in the distance on their doorsteps confided their alarms. Now the
school was closed; and all the children were running about, there was
a swarm of little creatures shouting and tumbling and fighting; while
those fathers who were not at the public-house were resting in groups
of three or four, crouching on their heels as they did in the mine,
smoking their pipes with an occasional word in the shelter of a wall.
Pierronne went off in a fury when Levaque wanted to feel if her thighs
were firm; and he himself decided to go alone to Rasseneur's, since
Maheu was still planting.

Twilight suddenly came on; Maheude lit the lamp, irritated because
neither her daughter nor the boys had come back. She could have guessed
as much; they never succeeded in taking together the only meal of the
day at which it was possible for them to be all round the table. Then
she was waiting for the dandelion salad. What could he be gathering
at this hour, in this blackness of an oven, that nuisance of a child!
A salad would go so well with the stew which was simmering on the
fire--potatoes, leeks, sorrel, fricasseed with fried onion. The whole
house smelt of that fried onion, that good odour which gets rank so
soon, and which penetrates the bricks of the settlements with such
infection that one perceives it far off in the country, the violent
flavour of the poor man's kitchen.

Maheu, when he left the garden at nightfall, at once fell into a chair
with his head against the wall. As soon as he sat down in the evening
he went to sleep. The clock struck seven; Henri and Lnore had just
broken a plate in persisting in helping Alzire, who was laying the
table, when Father Bonnemort came in first, in a hurry to dine and go
back to the pit. Then Maheude woke up Maheu.

"Come and eat! So much the worse! They are big enough to find the
house. The nuisance is the salad!"




CHAPTER V


At Rasseneur's, after having eaten his soup, tienne went back into
the small chamber beneath the roof and facing the Voreux, which he was
to occupy, and fell on to his bed dressed as he was, overcome with
fatigue. In two days he had not slept four hours. When he awoke in the
twilight he was dazed for a moment, not recognizing his surroundings;
and he felt such uneasiness and his head was so heavy that he rose,
painfully, with the idea of getting some fresh air before having his
dinner and going to bed for the night.

Outside, the weather was becoming milder: the sooty sky was growing
copper-coloured, laden with one of those warm rains of the Nord, the
approach of which one feels by the moist warmth of the air, and the
night was coming on in great mists which drowned the distant landscape
of the plain. Over this immense sea of reddish earth the low sky seemed
to melt into black dust, without a breath of wind now to animate the
darkness. It was the wan and deathly melancholy of a funeral.

tienne walked straight ahead at random, with no other aim but to shake
off his fever. When he passed before the Voreux, already growing gloomy
at the bottom of its hole and with no lantern yet shining from it, he
stopped a moment to watch the departure of the day-workers. No doubt
six o'clock had struck; landers, porters from the pit-eye, and grooms
were going away in bands, mixed with the vague and laughing figures of
the screening girls in the shade.

At first it was Brul and her son-in-law, Pierron. She was abusing him
because he had not supported her in a quarrel with an overseer over her
reckoning of stones.

"Get along! damned good-for-nothing! Do you call yourself a man to
lower yourself like that before one of these beasts who devour us?"

Pierron followed her peacefully, without replying. At last he said:

"I suppose I ought to jump on the boss? Thanks for showing me how to
get into a mess!"

"Bend your backside to him, then," she shouted. "By God! if my daughter
had listened to me! It's not enough for them to kill the father.
Perhaps you'd like me to say 'thank you.' No, I'll have their skins
first!"

Their voices were lost. tienne saw her disappear, with her eagle nose,
her flying white hair, her long, lean arms that gesticulated furiously.
But the conversation of two young people behind caused him to listen.
He had recognized Zacharie, who was waiting there, and who had just
been addressed by his friend Mouquet.

"Are you here?" said the latter. "We will have something to eat, and
then off to the Volcan."

"Directly. I've something to attend to."

"What, then?"

The lander turned and saw Philomne coming out of the screening-shed.
He thought he understood.

"Very well, if it's that. Then I go ahead."

"Yes, I'll catch you up."

As he went away, Mouquet met his father, old Mouque, who was also
coming out of the Voreux. The two men simply wished each other good
evening, the son taking the main road while the father went along by
the canal.

Zacharie was already pushing Philomne in spite of her resistance into
the same solitary path. She was in a hurry, another time; and the two
wrangled like old housemates. There was no fun in only seeing one
another out of doors, especially in winter, when the earth is moist and
there are no wheatfields to lie in.

"No, no, it's not that," he whispered impatiently. "I've something to
say to you." He led her gently with his arm round her waist. Then, when
they were in the shadow of the pit-bank, he asked if she had any money.

"What for?" she demanded.

Then he became confused, spoke of a debt of two francs which had
reduced his family to despair.

"Hold your tongue! I've seen Mouquet; you're going again to the Volcan
with him, where those dirty singer-women are."

He defended himself, struck his chest, gave his word of honour. Then,
as she shrugged her shoulders, he said suddenly:

"Come with us if it will amuse you. You see that you don't put me out.
What do I want to do with the singers? Will you come?"

"And the little one?" she replied. "How can one stir with a child
that's always screaming? Let me go back, I guess they're not getting on
at the house."

But he held her and entreated. See! it was only not to look foolish
before Mouquet to whom he had promised. A man could not go to bed every
evening like the fowls. She was overcome, and pulled up the skirt of
her gown; with her nail she cut the thread and drew out some half-franc
pieces from a corner of the hem. For fear of being robbed by her mother
she hid there the profit of the overtime work she did at the pit.

"I've got five, you see," she said, "I'll give you three. Only you must
swear that you'll make your mother decide to let us marry. We've had
enough of this life in the open air. And mother reproaches me for every
mouthful I eat. Swear first."

She spoke with the soft voice of a big, delicate girl, without passion,
simply tired of her life. He swore, exclaimed that it was a sacred
promise; then, when he had got the three pieces, he kissed her, tickled
her, made her laugh, and would have pushed things to an extreme in
this corner of the pit-bank, which was the winter chamber of their
household, if she had not again refused, saying that it would not give
her any pleasure. She went back to the settlement alone, while he cut
across the fields to rejoin his companion.

tienne had followed them mechanically, from afar, without
understanding, regarding it as a simple rendezvous. The girls were
precocious in the pits; and he recalled the Lille work-girls whom he
had waited for behind the factories, those bands of girls, corrupted at
fourteen, in the abandonment of their wretchedness. But another meeting
surprised him more. He stopped.

At the bottom of the pit-bank, in a hollow into which some large stones
had slipped, little Jeanlin was violently snubbing Lydie and Bbert,
seated one at his right, the other at his left.

"What do you say? Eh? I'll slap each of you if you want more. Who
thought of it first, eh?"

In fact, Jeanlin had had an idea. After having roamed about in the
meadows, along the canal, for an hour, gathering dandelions with the
two others, it had occurred to him, before this pile of salad, that
they would never eat all that at home; and instead of going back to the
settlement he had gone to Montsou, keeping Bbert to watch, and making
Lydie ring at the houses and offer the dandelions. He was experienced
enough to know that, as he said, girls could sell what they liked.
In the ardour of business, the entire pile had disappeared; but the
girl had gained eleven sous. And now, with empty hands, the three were
dividing the profits.

"That's not fair!" Bbert declared. "Must divide into three. If you
keep seven sous we shall only have two each."

"What? not fair!" replied Jeanlin furiously. "I gathered more first of
all."

The other usually submitted with timid admiration and a credulity which
always made him the dupe. Though older and stronger, he even allowed
himself to be struck. But this time the sight of all that money excited
him to rebellion.

"He's robbing us, Lydie, isn't he? If he doesn't share, we'll tell his
mother."

Jeanlin at once thrust his fist beneath the other's nose.

"Say that again! I'll go and say at your house that you sold my
mother's salad. And then, you silly beast, how can I divide eleven
sous into three? Just try and see, if you're so clever. Here are your
two sous each. Just look sharp and take them, or I'll put them in my
pocket."

Bbert was vanquished and accepted the two sous. Lydie, who was
trembling, had said nothing, for with Jeanlin she experienced the fear
and the tenderness of a little beaten woman. When he held out the two
sous to her she advanced her hand with a submissive laugh. But he
suddenly changed his mind.

"Eh! what will you do with all that? Your mother will nab them, sure
enough, if you don't know how to hide them from her. I'd better keep
them for you. When you want money you can ask me for it."

And the nine sous disappeared. To shut her mouth he had put his arms
around her laughingly and was rolling with her over the pit-bank. She
was his little wife, and in the dark corners they used to try together
the love which they heard and saw in their homes behind partitions,
through the cracks of doors. They knew everything, but they were able
to do nothing, being too young, fumbling and playing for hours at the
games of vicious puppies. He called that playing at papa and mama; and
when he chased her she ran away and let herself be caught with the
delicious trembling of instinct, often angry, but always yielding, in
the expectation of something which never came.

As Bbert was not admitted to these games and received a cuffing
whenever he wanted to touch Lydie, he was always constrained, agitated
by anger and uneasiness when the other two were amusing themselves,
which they did not hesitate to do in his presence. His one idea,
therefore, was to frighten them and disturb them, calling out that
someone could see them.

"It's all up! There's a man looking."

This time he told the truth; it was tienne, who had decided to
continue his walk. The children jumped up and ran away, and he passed
by round the bank, following the canal, amused at the terror of these
little rascals. No doubt it was too early at their age, but they saw
and heard so much that one would have to tie them up to restrain them.
Yet tienne became sad.

A hundred paces farther on he came across more couples. He had arrived
at Rquillart, and there, around the old ruined mine, all the girls of
Montsou prowled about with their lovers. It was the common rendezvous,
the remote and deserted spot to which the putters came to get their
first child when they dared not risk the shed. The broken palings
opened to every one the old yard, now become a nondescript piece of
ground, obstructed by the ruins of the two sheds which had fallen
in, and by the skeletons of the large buttresses which were still
standing. Derelict trams were lying about, and piles of old rotting
wood, while a dense vegetation was reconquering this corner of ground,
displaying itself in thick grass, and springing up in young trees that
were already vigorous. Every girl found herself at home here; there
were concealed holes for all; their lovers placed them over beams,
behind the timber, in the trams; they even lay elbow to elbow without
troubling about their neighbours. And it seemed that around this
extinguished engine, near this shaft weary of disgorging coal, there
was a revenge of creation in the free love which, beneath the lash of
instinct, planted children in the bellies of these girls who were yet
hardly women.

Yet a caretaker lived there, old Mouque, to whom the Company had given
up, almost beneath the destroyed tower, two rooms which were constantly
threatened by destruction from the expected fall of the last walls.
He had even been obliged to shore up a part of the roof, and he lived
there very comfortably with his family, he and Mouquet in one room,
Mouquette in the other. As the windows no longer possessed a single
pane, he had decided to close them by nailing up boards; one could
not see well, but it was warm. For the rest, this caretaker cared for
nothing: he went to look after his horses at the Voreux, and never
troubled himself about the ruins of Rquillart, of which the shaft
only was preserved, in order to serve as a chimney for a fire which
ventilated the neighbouring pit.

It was thus that Father Mouque was ending his old age in the midst of
love. Ever since she was ten Mouquette had been lying about in all the
corners of the ruins, not as a timid and still green little urchin
like Lydie, but as a girl who was already big, and a mate for bearded
lads. The father had nothing to say, for she was considerate, and
never introduced a lover into the house. Then he was used to this sort
of accident. When he went to the Voreux, when he came back, whenever
he came out of his hole, he could scarcely put a foot down without
treading on a couple in the grass; and it was worse if he wanted to
gather wood to heat his soup or look for burdocks for his rabbit at
the other end of the enclosure. Then he saw one by one the voluptuous
noses of all the girls of Montsou rising up around him, while he had
to be careful not to knock against the limbs stretched out level with
the paths. Besides, these meetings had gradually ceased to disturb
either him who was simply taking care not to stumble, or the girls whom
he allowed to finish their affairs, going away with discreet little
steps like a worthy man who was at peace with the ways of nature. Only
just as they now knew him he at last also knew them, as one knows the
rascally magpies who become corrupted in the pear-trees in the garden.
Ah! youth! youth! how it goes on, how wild it is! Sometimes he wagged
his chin with silent regret, turning away from the noisy wantons who
were breathing too loudly in the darkness. Only one thing put him out
of temper: two lovers had acquired the bad habit of embracing outside
his wall. It was not that it prevented him from sleeping, but they
leaned against the wall so heavily that at last they damaged it.

Every evening old Mouque received a visit from his friend, Father
Bonnemort, who regularly before dinner took the same walk. The two old
men spoke little, scarcely exchanging ten words during the half-hour
that they spent together. But it cheered them thus to think over the
days of old, to chew their recollections over again without need to
talk of them. At Rquillart they sat on a beam side by side, saying a
word and then sinking into their dreams, with faces bent towards the
earth. No doubt they were becoming young again. Around them lovers
were turning over their sweethearts; there was a murmur of kisses and
laughter; the warm odour of the girls arose in the freshness of the
trodden grass. It was now forty-three years since Father Bonnemort had
taken his wife behind the pit; she was a putter, so slight that he had
placed her on a tram to embrace her at ease. Ah! those were fine days.
And the two old men, shaking their heads, at last left each other,
often without saying good night.

That evening, however, as tienne arrived, Father Bonnemort, who was
getting up from the beam to return to the settlement, said to Mouque:

"Good night, old man. I say, you knew Roussie?"

Mouque was silent for a moment, rocked his shoulders; then, returning
to the house:

"Good night, good night, old man."

tienne came and sat on the beam, in his turn. His sadness was
increasing, though he could not tell why. The old man, whose
disappearing back he watched, recalled his arrival in the morning,
and the flood of words which the piercing wind had dragged from his
silence. What wretchedness! And all these girls, worn out with fatigue,
who were still stupid enough in the evening to fabricate little ones,
to yield flesh for labour and suffering! It would never come to an end
if they were always filling themselves with starvelings. Would it not
be better if they were to shut up their bellies, and press their thighs
together, as at the approach of misfortune? Perhaps these gloomy ideas
only stirred confusedly in him because he was alone, while all the
others at this hour were going about taking their pleasure in couples.
The mild weather stifled him a little, occasional drops of rain fell on
his feverish hands. Yes, they all came to it; it was something stronger
than reason.

Just then, as tienne remained seated motionless in the shadow, a
couple who came down from Montsou rustled against him without seeing
him as they entered the uneven Rquillart ground. The girl, certainly a
virgin, was struggling and resisting with low whispered supplications,
while the lad in silence was pushing her towards the darkness of a
corner of the shed, still upright, under which there were piles of
old mouldy rope. It was Catherine and big Chaval. But tienne had not
recognized them in passing, and his eyes followed them; he was watching
for the end of the story, touched by a sensuality which changed the
course of his thoughts. Why should he interfere? When girls refuse it
is because they like first to be forced.

On leaving the settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante Catherine had gone
to Montsou along the road. From the age of ten, since she had earned
her living at the pit, she went about the country alone in the complete
liberty of the colliers' families; and if no man had possessed her at
fifteen it was owing to the tardy awakening of her puberty, the crisis
of which had not yet arrived. When she was in front of the Company's
Yards she crossed the road and entered a laundress's where she was
certain to find Mouquette; for the latter stayed there from morning
till night, among women who treated each other with coffee all round.
But she was disappointed; Mouquette had just then been regaling them in
her turn so thoroughly that she was not able to lend the half-franc she
had promised. To console her they vainly offered a glass of hot coffee.
She was not even willing that her companion should borrow from another
woman. An idea of economy had come to her, a sort of superstitious
fear, the certainty that that ribbon would bring her bad luck if she
were to buy it now.

She hastened to regain the road to the settlement, and had reached the
last houses of Montsou when a man at the door of the Piquette Estaminet
called her:

"Eh! Catherine! where are you off to so quick?"

It was lanky Chaval. She was vexed, not because he displeased her, but
because she was not inclined to joke.

"Come in and have a drink. A little glass of sweet, won't you?"

She refused politely; the night was coming on, they were expecting her
at home. He had advanced, and was entreating her in a low voice in the
middle of the road. It had been his idea for a long time to persuade
her to come up to the room which he occupied on the first story of the
Estaminet Piquette, a fine room for a household, with a large bed. Did
he frighten her, that she always refused? She laughed good-naturedly,
and said that she would come up some day when children didn't grow.
Then, one thing leading to another, she told him, without knowing how,
about the blue ribbon which she had not been able to buy.

"But I'll pay for it," he exclaimed.

She blushed, feeling that it would be best to refuse again, but
possessed by a strong desire to have the ribbon. The idea of a loan
came back to her, and at last she accepted on condition that she should
return to him what he spent on her. They began to joke again: it was
agreed that if she did not sleep with him she should return him the
money. But there was another difficulty when he talked of going to
Maigrat's.

"No, not Maigrat's; mother won't let me."

"Why? is there any need to say where one goes? He has the best ribbons
in Montsou."

When Maigrat saw lanky Chaval and Catherine coming to his shop like two
lovers who are buying their engagement gifts, he became very red, and
exhibited his pieces of blue ribbon with the rage of a man who is being
made fun of. Then, when he had served the young people, he planted
himself at the door to watch them disappear in the twilight; and when
his wife came to ask him a question in a timid voice, he fell on her,
abusing her, and exclaiming that he would make them repent some day,
the filthy creatures, who had no gratitude, when they ought all to be
on the ground licking his feet.

Lanky Chaval accompanied Catherine along the road. He walked beside
her, swinging his arms; only he pushed her by the hip, conducting her
without seeming to do so. She suddenly perceived that he had made her
leave the pavement and that they were taking the narrow Rquillart
road. But she had no time to be angry; his arm was already round her
waist, and he was dazing her with a constant caress of words. How
stupid she was to be afraid! Did he want to hurt such a little darling,
who was as soft as silk, so tender that he could have devoured her?
And he breathed behind her ear, in her neck, so that a shudder passed
over the skin of her whole body. She felt stifled, and had nothing to
reply. It was true that he seemed to love her. On Saturday evenings,
after having blown out the candle, she had asked herself what would
happen if he were to take her in this way; then, on going to sleep,
she had dreamed that she would no longer refuse, quite overcome by
pleasure. Why, then, at the same idea to-day did she feel repugnance
and something like regret? While he was tickling her neck with his
moustache so softly that she closed her eyes, the shadow of another
man, of the lad she had seen that morning, passed over the darkness of
her closed eyelids.

Catherine suddenly looked around her. Chaval had conducted her into the
ruins of Rquillart and she recoiled, shuddering, from the darkness of
the fallen shed.

"Oh! no! oh, no!" she murmured, "please let me go!" The fear of the
male had taken hold of her, that fear which stiffens the muscles in
an impulse of defence, even when girls are willing, and feel the
conquering approach of man. Her virginity which had nothing to learn
took fright as at a threatening blow, a wound of which she feared the
unknown pain.

"No, no! I don't want to! I tell you that I am too young. It's true!
Another time, when I am quite grown up."

He growled in a low voice:

"Stupid! There's nothing to fear. What does that matter?"

But without speaking more he had seized her firmly and pushed her
beneath the shed. And she fell on her back on the old ropes; she ceased
to protest, yielding to the male before her time, with that hereditary
submission which from childhood had thrown down in the open air all the
girls of her race. Her frightened stammering grew faint, and only the
ardent breath of the man was heard.

tienne, however, had listened without moving. Another who was taking
the leap! And now that he had seen the comedy he got up, overcome
by uneasiness, by a kind of jealous excitement in which there was a
touch of anger. He no longer restrained himself; he stepped over the
beams, for those two were too much occupied now to be disturbed. He was
surprised, therefore, when he had gone a hundred paces along the path,
to find that they were already standing up, and that they appeared,
like himself, to be returning to the settlement. The man again had
his arm round the girl's waist, and was squeezing her, with an air of
gratitude, still speaking in her neck; and it was she who seemed in a
hurry, anxious to return quickly, and annoyed at the delay.

Then tienne was tormented by the desire to see their faces. It was
foolish, and he hastened his steps, so as not to yield to it; but
his feet slackened of their own accord, and at the first lamppost he
concealed himself in the shade. He was petrified by horror when he
recognized Catherine and lanky Chaval. He hesitated at first: was it
indeed she, that young girl in the coarse blue dress, with that bonnet?
Was that the urchin whom he had seen in breeches, with her head in
the canvas cap? That was why she could pass so near him without his
recognizing her. But he no longer doubted; he had seen her eyes again,
with their greenish limpidity of spring water, so clear and so deep.
What a wench! And he experienced a furious desire to avenge himself on
her with contempt, without any motive. Besides, he did not like her as
a girl: she was frightful.

Catherine and Chaval had passed him slowly. They did not know that they
were watched. He held her to kiss her behind the ear, and she began
to slacken her steps beneath his caresses, which made her laugh. Left
behind, tienne was obliged to follow them, irritated because they
barred the road and because in spite of himself he had to witness these
things which exasperated him. It was true, then, what she had sworn to
him in the morning: she was not any one's mistress; and he, who had not
believed her, who had deprived himself of her in order not to act like
the other! and who had let her be taken beneath his nose, pushing his
stupidity so far as to be dirtily amused at seeing them! It made him
mad! he clenched his hands, he could have devoured that man in one of
those impulses to kill in which he saw everything red.

The walk lasted for half an hour. When Chaval and Catherine approached
the Voreux they slackened their pace still more; they stopped twice
beside the canal, three times along the pit-bank, very cheerful now and
occupied with little tender games. tienne was obliged to stop also
when they stopped, for fear of being perceived. He endeavoured to feel
nothing but a brutal regret: that would teach him to treat girls with
consideration through being well brought up! Then, after passing the
Voreux, and at last free to go and dine at Rasseneur's, he continued
to follow them, accompanying them to the settlement, where he remained
standing in the shade for a quarter of an hour, waiting until Chaval
left Catherine to enter her home. And when he was quite sure that they
were no longer together, he set off walking afresh, going very far
along the Marchiennes road, stamping, and thinking of nothing, too
stifled and too sad to shut himself up in a room.

It was not until an hour later, towards nine o'clock, that tienne
again passed the settlement, saying to himself that he must eat and
sleep, if he was to be up again at four o'clock in the morning. The
village was already asleep, and looked quite black in the night. Not a
gleam shone from the closed shutters, the house fronts slept, with the
heavy sleep of snoring barracks. Only a cat escaped through the empty
gardens. It was the end of the day, the collapse of workers falling
from the table to the bed, overcome with weariness and food.

At Rasseneur's, in the lighted room, an engine-man and two day-workers
were drinking. But before going in tienne stopped to throw one last
glance into the darkness. He saw again the same black immensity as in
the morning when he had arrived in the wind. Before him the Voreux was
crouching, with its air of an evil beast, its dimness pricked with a
few lantern lights. The three braziers of the bank were burning in the
air, like bloody moons, now and then showing the vast silhouettes of
Father Bonnemort and his yellow horse. And beyond, in the flat plain,
shade had submerged everything, Montsou, Marchiennes, the forest of
Vandame, the immense sea of beetroot and of wheat, in which there only
shone, like distant lighthouses, the blue fires of the blast furnaces,
and the red fires of the coke ovens. Gradually the night came on, the
rain was now falling slowly, continuously, burying this void in its
monotonous streaming. Only one voice was still heard, the thick, slow
respiration of the pumping engine, breathing both by day and by night.




PART THREE




CHAPTER I


On the next day, and the days that followed, tienne continued his
work at the pit. He grew accustomed to it; his existence became
regulated by this labour and to these new habits which had seemed
so hard to him at first. Only one episode interrupted the monotony
of the first fortnight: a slight fever which kept him in bed for
forty-eight hours with aching limbs and throbbing head, dreaming in a
state of semi-delirium that he was pushing his tram in a passage that
was so narrow that his body would not pass through. It was simply the
exhaustion of his apprenticeship, an excess of fatigue from which he
quickly recovered.

And days followed days, until weeks and months had slipped by. Now,
like his mates, he got up at three o'clock, drank his coffee, and
carried off the double slice of bread and butter which Madame Rasseneur
had prepared for him the evening before. Regularly as he went every
morning to the pit, he met old Bonnemort who was going home to sleep,
and on leaving in the afternoon he crossed Bouteloup who was going
to his task. He had his cap, his breeches and canvas jacket, and he
shivered and warmed his back in the shed before the large fire. Then
came the waiting with naked feet in the receiving-room, swept by
furious currents of air. But the engine, with its great steel limbs
starred with copper shining up above in the shade, no longer attracted
his attention, nor the cables which flew by with the black and
silent motion of a nocturnal bird, nor the cages rising and plunging
unceasingly in the midst of the noise of signals, of shouted orders, of
trams shaking the metal floor. His lamp burnt badly, that confounded
lamp-man could not have cleaned it; and he only woke up when Mouquet
bundled them all off, roguishly smacking the girls' flanks. The cage
was unfastened, and fell like a stone to the bottom of a hole without
causing him even to lift his head to see the daylight vanish. He never
thought of a possible fall; he felt himself at home as he sank into the
darkness beneath the falling rain. Below at the pit-eye, when Pierron
had unloaded them with his air of hypocritical mildness, there was
always the same tramping as of a flock, the yard-men each going away
to his cutting with trailing steps. He now knew the mine galleries
better than the streets of Montsou; he knew where he had to turn, where
he had to stoop, and where he had to avoid a puddle. He had grown so
accustomed to these two kilometres beneath the earth, that he could
have traversed them without a lamp, with his hands in his pockets. And
every time the same meetings took place: a captain lighting up the
faces of the passing workmen, Father Mouque leading a horse, Bbert
conducting the snorting Bataille, Jeanlin running behind the tram to
close the ventilation doors, and big Mouquette and lean Lydie pushing
their trams.

After a time, also, tienne suffered much less from the damp and
closeness of the cutting. The chimney or ascending passage seemed to
him more convenient for climbing up, as if he had melted and could
pass through cracks where before he would not have risked a hand.
He breathed the coal-dust without difficulty, saw clearly in the
obscurity, and sweated tranquilly, having grown accustomed to the
sensation of wet garments on his body from morning to night. Besides,
he no longer spent his energy recklessly; he had gained skill so
rapidly that he astonished the whole stall. In three weeks he was
named among the best putters in the pit; no one pushed a tram more
rapidly to the upbrow, nor loaded it afterwards so correctly. His small
figure allowed him to slip about everywhere, and though his arms were
as delicate and white as a woman's, they seemed to be made of iron
beneath the smooth skin, so vigorously did they perform their task.
He never complained, out of pride no doubt, even when he was panting
with fatigue. The only thing they had against him was that he could not
take a joke, and grew angry as soon as any one trod on his toes. In all
other respects he was accepted and looked upon as a real miner, reduced
beneath this pressure of habit, little by little, to a machine.

Maheu regarded tienne with special friendship, for he respected work
that was well done. Then, like the others, he felt that this lad had
more education than himself; he saw him read, write, and draw little
plans; he heard him talking of things of which he himself did not
know even the existence. This caused him no astonishment, for miners
are rough fellows who have thicker heads than engine-men; but he was
surprised at the courage of this little chap, and at the cheerful way
he had bitten into the coal to avoid dying of hunger. He had never met
a workman who grew accustomed to it so quickly. So when hewing was
urgent, and he did not wish to disturb a pikeman, he gave the timbering
over to the young man, being sure of the neatness and solidity of his
work. The bosses were always bothering him about the damned planking
question; he feared every hour the appearance of the engineer Ngrel,
followed by Dansaert, shouting, discussing, ordering everything to
be done over again, and he remarked that his putter's timbering gave
greater satisfaction to these gentlemen, in spite of their air of never
being pleased with anything, and their repeated assertions that the
Company would one day or another take radical measures. Things dragged
on; a deep discontent was fomenting in the pit, and Maheu himself, in
spite of his calmness, was beginning to clench his fists.

There was at first some rivalry between Zacharie and tienne. One
evening they were even coming to blows. But the former, a good lad
though careless of everything but his own pleasure, was quickly
appeased by the friendly offer of a glass, and soon yielded to the
superiority of the new-comer. Levaque was also on good terms with
him, talking politics with the putter, who, as he said, had his own
ideas. The only one of the men in whom he felt a deep hostility was
lanky Chaval: not that they were cool towards each other, for, on
the contrary, they had become companions; only when they joked their
eyes seemed to devour each other. Catherine continued to move among
them as a tired, resigned girl, bending her back, pushing her tram,
always good-natured with her companion in the putting, who aided her
in his turn, and submissive to the wishes of her lover, whose caresses
she now received openly. It was an accepted situation, a recognized
domestic arrangement to which the family itself closed its eyes to
such a degree that Chaval every evening led away the putter behind the
pit-bank, then brought her back to her parents' door, where he finally
embraced her before the whole settlement. tienne, who believed that he
had reconciled himself to the situation, often teased her about these
walks, making crude remarks by way of joke, as lads and girls will at
the bottom of the cuttings; and she replied in the same tone, telling
in a swaggering way what her lover had done to her, yet disturbed and
growing pale when the young man's eyes chanced to meet hers. Then both
would turn away their heads, not speaking again, perhaps, for an hour,
looking as if they hated each other because of something buried within
them and which they could never explain to each other.

The spring had come. On emerging from the pit one day tienne had
received in his face a warm April breeze, a good odour of young earth,
of tender greenness, of large open air; and now, every time he came
up the spring smelt sweeter, warmed him more, after his ten hours of
labour in the eternal winter at the bottom, in the midst of that damp
darkness which no summer had ever dissipated. The days grew longer and
longer; at last, in May, he went down at sunrise when a vermilion sky
lit up the Voreux with a mist of dawn in which the white vapour of the
pumping-engine became rose-coloured. There was no more shivering, a
warm breath blew across the plain, while the larks sang far above. Then
at three o'clock he was dazzled by the now burning sun which set fire
to the horizon, and reddened the bricks beneath the filth of the coal.
In June the wheat was already high, of a blue green, which contrasted
with the black green of the beetroots. It was an endless vista
undulating beneath the slightest breeze; and he saw it spread and grow
from day to day, and was sometimes surprised, as if he had found it in
the evening more swollen with verdure than it had been in the morning.
The poplars along the canal were putting on their plumes of leaves.
Grass was invading the pit-bank, flowers were covering the meadows, a
whole life was germinating and pushing up from this earth beneath which
he was groaning in misery and fatigue.

When tienne now went for a walk in the evening he no longer startled
lovers behind the pit-bank. He could follow their track in the wheat
and divine their wanton birds' nests by eddies among the yellowing
blades and the great red poppies. Zacharie and Philomne came back to
it out of old domestic habit; Mother Brul, always on Lydie's heels,
was constantly hunting her out with Jeanlin, buried so deeply together
that one had to tread on them before they made up their minds to get
up; and as to Mouquette, she lay about everywhere--one could not cross
a field without seeing her head plunge down while only her feet emerged
as she lay at full length. But all these were quite free; the young man
found nothing guilty there except on the evenings when he met Catherine
and Chaval. Twice he saw them on his approach tumble down in the midst
of a field, where the motionless stalks afterwards remained dead.
Another time, as he was going along a narrow path, Catherine's clear
eyes appeared before him, level with the wheat, and immediately sank.
Then the immense plain seemed to him too small, and he preferred to
pass the evening at Rasseneur's, in the Avantage.

"Give me a glass, Madame Rasseneur. No, I'm not going out to-night; my
legs are too stiff."

And he turned towards a comrade, who always sat at the bottom table
with his head against the wall.

"Souvarine, won't you have one?"

"No, thanks; nothing."

tienne had become acquainted with Souvarine through living there side
by side. He was an engine-man at the Voreux, and occupied the furnished
room upstairs next to his own. He must have been about thirty years
old, fair and slender, with a delicate face framed by thick hair and a
slight beard. His white pointed teeth, his thin mouth and nose, with
his rosy complexion, gave him a girlish appearance, an air of obstinate
gentleness, across which the grey reflection of his steely eyes threw
savage gleams. In his poor workman's room there was nothing but a box
of papers and books. He was a Russian, and never spoke of himself, so
that many stories were afloat concerning him. The colliers, who are
very suspicious with strangers, guessing from his small middle-class
hands that he belonged to another caste, had at first imagined a
romance, some assassination, and that he was escaping punishment. But
then he had behaved in such a fraternal way with them, without any
pride, distributing to the youngsters of the settlement all the sous
in his pockets, that they now accepted him, reassured by the term
"political refugee" which circulated about him--a vague term, in which
they saw an excuse even for crime, and, as it were, a companionship in
suffering.

During the first weeks, tienne had found him timid and reserved, so
that he only discovered his history later on. Souvarine was the latest
born of a noble family in the Government of Tula. At St. Petersburg,
where he studied medicine, the socialistic enthusiasm which then
carried away all the youth in Russia had decided him to learn a manual
trade, that of a mechanic, so that he could mix with the people, in
order to know them and help them as a brother. And it was by this
trade that he was now living after having fled, in consequence of an
unsuccessful attempt against the tsar's life: for a month he had lived
in a fruiterer's cellar, hollowing out a mine underneath the road,
and charging bombs, with the constant risk of being blown up with
the house. Renounced by his family, without money, expelled from the
French workshops as a foreigner who was regarded as a spy, he was dying
of starvation when the Montsou Company had at last taken him on at a
moment of pressure. For a year he had laboured there as a good, sober,
silent workman, doing day-work one week and night-work the next week,
so regularly that the masters referred to him as an example to the
others.

"Are you never thirsty?" said tienne to him, laughing.

And he replied with his gentle voice, almost without an accent:

"I am thirsty when I eat."

His companion also joked him about the girls, declaring that he had
seen him with a putter in the wheat on the Bas-de-Soie side. Then he
shrugged his shoulders with tranquil indifference. What should he do
with a putter? Woman was for him a boy, a comrade, when she had the
fraternal feeling and the courage of a man. What was the good of having
a possible act of cowardice on one's conscience? He desired no bond,
either woman or friend; he would be master of his own life and those of
others.

Every evening towards nine o'clock, when the inn was emptying, tienne
remained thus talking with Souvarine. He drank his beer in small
sips, while the engine-man smoked constant cigarettes, of which the
tobacco had at last stained his slender fingers. His vague mystic's
eyes followed the smoke in the midst of a dream; his left hand sought
occupation by nervously twitching; and he usually ended by installing a
tame rabbit on his knees, a large doe with young, who lived at liberty
in the house. This rabbit, which he had named Poland, had grown to
worship him; she would come and smell his trousers, fawn on him and
scratch him with her paws until he took her up like a child. Then,
lying in a heap against him, her ears laid back, she would close her
eyes; and without growing tired, with an unconscious caressing gesture,
he would pass his hand over her grey silky fur, calmed by that warm
living softness.

"You know I have had a letter from Pluchart," said tienne one evening.

Only Rasseneur was there. The last client had departed for the
settlement, which was now going to bed.

"Ah!" exclaimed the innkeeper, standing up before his two lodgers. "How
are things going with Pluchart?"

During the last two months, tienne had kept up a constant
correspondence with the Lille mechanician, whom he had told of his
Montsou engagement, and who was now indoctrinating him, having been
struck by the propaganda which he might carry on among the miners.

"The association is getting on very well. It seems that they are coming
in from all sides."

"What have you got to say, eh, about their society?" asked Rasseneur of
Souvarine.

The latter, who was softly scratching Poland's head, blew out a puff of
smoke and muttered, with his tranquil air:

"More foolery!"

But tienne grew enthusiastic. A predisposition for revolt was throwing
him, in the first illusions of his ignorance, into the struggle
of labour against capital. It was the International Working Men's
Association that they were concerned with, that famous International
which had just been founded in London. Was not that a superb effort, a
campaign in which justice would at last triumph? No more frontiers; the
workers of the whole world rising and uniting to assure to the labourer
the bread that he has earned. And what a simple and great organization!
Below, the section which represents the commune; then the federation
which groups the sections of the same province; then the nation; and
then, at last, humanity incarnated in a general council in which each
nation was represented by a corresponding secretary. In six months
it would conquer the world, and would be able to dictate laws to the
masters should they prove obstinate.

"Foolery!" repeated Souvarine. "Your Karl Marx is still only thinking
about letting natural forces act. No politics, no conspiracies, is it
not so? Everything in the light of day, and simply to raise wages.
Don't bother me with your evolution! Set fire to the four corners of
the town, mow down the people, level everything, and when there is
nothing more of this rotten world left standing, perhaps a better one
will grow up in its place."

tienne began to laugh. He did not always take in his comrade's
sayings; this theory of destruction seemed to him an affectation.
Rasseneur, who was still more practical, like a man of solid common
sense did not condescend to get angry. He only wanted to have things
clear.

"Then, what? Are you going to try and create a section at Montsou?"

This was what was desired by Pluchart, who was secretary to the
Federation of the Nord. He insisted especially on the services which
the association would render to the miners should they go out on
strike. tienne believed that a strike was imminent: this timbering
business would turn out badly; any further demands on the part of the
Company would cause rebellion in all the pits.

"It's the subscriptions that are the nuisance," Rasseneur declared, in
a judicial tone. "Half a franc a year for the general fund, two francs
for the section; it looks like nothing, but I bet that many will refuse
to give it."

"All the more," added tienne, "because we must first have here a
Provident Fund, which we can use if need be as an emergency fund. No
matter, it is time to think about these things. I am ready if the
others are."

There was silence. The petroleum lamp smoked on the counter. Through
the large open door they could distinctly hear the shovel of a stoker
at the Voreux stoking the engine.

"Everything is so dear!" began Madame Rasseneur, who had entered
and was listening with a gloomy air as if she had grown up in her
everlasting black dress. "When I tell you that I've paid twenty-two
sous for eggs! It will have to burst up."

All three men this time were of the same opinion. They spoke one after
the other in a despairing voice, giving expression to their complaints.
The workers could not hold out; the Revolution had only aggravated
their wretchedness; only the bourgeois had grown fat since '89, so
greedily that they had not even left the bottom of the plates to lick.
Who could say that the workers had had their reasonable share in the
extraordinary increase of wealth and comfort during the last hundred
years? They had made fun of them by declaring them free. Yes, free to
starve, a freedom of which they fully availed themselves. It put no
bread into your cupboard to go and vote for fine fellows who went away
and enjoyed themselves, thinking no more of the wretched voters than
of their old boots. No! one way or another it would have to come to an
end, either quietly by laws, by an understanding in good fellowship,
or like savages by burning everything and devouring one another. Even
if they never saw it, their children would certainly see it, for the
century could not come to an end without another revolution, that of
the workers this time, a general hustling which would cleanse society
from top to bottom, and rebuild it with more cleanliness and justice.

"It will have to burst up," Madame Rasseneur repeated energetically.

"Yes, yes," they all three cried. "It will have to burst up." Souvarine
was now tickling Poland's ears, and her nose was curling with pleasure.
He said in a low voice, with abstracted gaze, as if to himself:

"Raise wages--how can you? They're fixed by an iron law to the smallest
possible sum, just the sum necessary to allow the workers to eat dry
bread and get children. If they fall too low, the workers die, and the
demand for new men makes them rise. If they rise too high, more men
come, and they fall. It is the balance of empty bellies, a sentence to
a perpetual prison of hunger."

When he thus forgot himself, entering into the questions that stir an
educated socialist, tienne and Rasseneur became restless, disturbed by
his despairing statements which they were unable to answer.

"Do you understand?" he said again, gazing at them with his habitual
calmness; "we must destroy everything, or hunger will reappear. Yes,
anarchy and nothing more; the earth washed in blood and purified by
fire! Then we shall see!"

"Monsieur is quite right," said Madame Rasseneur, who, in her
revolutionary violence, was always very polite.

tienne, in despair at his ignorance, would argue no longer. He rose,
remarking:

"Let's go to bed. All this won't save one from getting up at three
o'clock."

Souvarine, having blown away the cigarette-end which was sticking to
his lips, was already gently lifting the big rabbit beneath the belly
to place it on the ground. Rasseneur was shutting up the house. They
separated in silence with buzzing ears, as if their heads had swollen
with the grave questions they had been discussing.

And every evening there were similar conversations in the bare room
around the single glass which tienne took an hour to empty. A crowd
of obscure ideas, asleep within him, were stirring and expanding.
Especially consumed by the need of knowledge, he had long hesitated
to borrow books from his neighbour, who unfortunately had hardly
any but German and Russian works. At last he had borrowed a French
book on Co-operative Societies--mere foolery, said Souvarine; and
he also regularly read a newspaper which the latter received, the
Combat, an Anarchist journal published at Geneva. In other respects,
notwithstanding their daily relations, he found him as reserved as
ever, with his air of camping in life, without interests or feelings or
possessions of any kind.

Towards the first days of July, tienne's situation began to improve.
In the midst of this monotonous life, always beginning over again,
an accident had occurred. The stalls in the Guillaume seam had come
across a shifting of the strata, a general disturbance in the layers,
which certainly announced that they were approaching a fault; and, in
fact, they soon came across this fault which the engineers, in spite
of considerable knowledge of the soil, were still ignorant of. This
upset the pit; nothing was talked of but the lost seam, which was to
be found, no doubt, lower down on the other side of the fault. The old
miners were already expanding their nostrils, like good dogs, in a
chase for coal. But, meanwhile, the hewers could not stand with folded
arms, and placards announced that the Company would put up new workings
to auction.

Maheu, on coming out one day, accompanied tienne and offered to take
him on as a pikeman in his working, in place of Levaque who had gone
to another yard. The matter had already been arranged with the head
captain and the engineer, who were very pleased with the young man. So
tienne merely had to accept this rapid promotion, glad of the growing
esteem in which Maheu held him.

In the evening they returned together to the pit to take note of the
placards. The cuttings put up to auction were in the Filonnire seam in
the north gallery of the Voreux. They did not seem very advantageous,
and the miner shook his head when the young man read out the
conditions. On the following day when they had gone down, he took him
to see the seam, and showed him how far away it was from the pit-eye,
the crumbly nature of the earth, the thinness and hardness of the coal.
But if they were to eat they would have to work. So on the following
Sunday they went to the auction, which took place in the shed and was
presided over by the engineer of the pit, assisted by the head captain,
in the absence of the divisional engineer. From five to six hundred
miners were there in front of the little platform, which was placed in
the corner, and the bidding went on so rapidly that one only heard a
deep tumult of voices, of shouted figures drowned by other figures.

For a moment Maheu feared that he would not be able to obtain one of
the forty workings offered by the Company. All the rivals went lower,
disquieted by the rumours of a crisis and the panic of a lock-out.
Ngrel, the engineer, did not hurry in the face of this panic, and
allowed the offers to fall to the lowest possible figures, while
Dansaert, anxious to push matters still further, lied with regard to
the quality of the workings. In order to get his fifty metres, Maheu
struggled with a comrade who was also obstinate; in turn they each took
off a centime from the tram; and if he conquered in the end it was only
by lowering the wage to such an extent, that the captain Richomme, who
was standing behind him, muttered between his teeth, and nudged him
with his elbow, growling angrily that he could never do it at that
price.

When they came out tienne was swearing. And he broke out before
Chaval, who was returning from the wheatfields in company with
Catherine, amusing himself while his father-in-law was absorbed in
serious business.

"By God!" he exclaimed, "it's simply slaughter! Today it is the worker
who is forced to devour the worker!"

Chaval was furious. He would never have lowered it, he wouldn't.
And Zacharie, who had come out of curiosity, declared that it was
disgusting. But tienne with a violent gesture silenced them.

"It will end some day, we shall be the masters!"

Maheu, who had been mute since the auction, appeared to wake up. He
repeated:

"Masters! Ah! bad luck! it can't be too soon!"




CHAPTER II


It was Montsou feast-day, the last Sunday in July. Since Saturday
evening the good housekeepers of the settlement had deluged their
parlours with water, throwing bucketfuls over the flags and against the
walls; and the floor was not yet dry, in spite of the white sand which
had been strewn over it, an expensive luxury for the purses of the
poor. But the day promised to be very warm; it was one of those heavy
skies threatening storm, which in summer stifle this flat bare country
of the Nord.

Sunday upset the hours for rising, even among the Maheus. While the
father, after five o'clock, grew weary of his bed and dressed himself,
the children lay in bed until nine. On this day Maheu went to smoke
a pipe in the garden, and then came back to eat his bread and butter
alone, while waiting. He thus passed the morning in a random manner; he
mended the tub, which leaked; stuck up beneath the clock a portrait of
the prince imperial which had been given to the little ones. However,
the others came down one by one. Father Bonnemort had taken a chair
outside, to sit in the sun, while the mother and Alzire had at once set
about cooking. Catherine appeared, pushing before her Lnore and Henri,
whom she had just dressed. Eleven o'clock struck, and the odour of the
rabbit, which was boiling with potatoes, was already filling the house
when Zacharie and Jeanlin came down last, still yawning and with their
swollen eyes.

The settlement was now in a flutter, excited by the feast-day, and
in expectation of dinner, which was being hastened for the departure
in bands to Montsou. Troops of children were rushing about. Men in
their shirt-sleeves were trailing their old shoes with the lazy gait
of days of rest. Windows and doors, opened wide in the fine weather,
gave glimpses of rows of parlours which were filled with movement and
shouts and the chatter of families. And from one end to the other of
the frontages, there was a smell of rabbit, a rich kitchen smell which
on this day struggled with the inveterate odour of fried onion.

The Maheus dined at midday. They made little noise in the midst of
the chatter from door to door, in the coming and going of women in
a constant uproar of calls and replies, of objects borrowed, of
youngsters hunted away or brought back with a slap. Besides, they
had not been on good terms during the last three weeks with their
neighbours, the Levaques, on the subject of the marriage of Zacharie
and Philomne. The men passed the time of day, but the women pretended
not to know each other. This quarrel had strengthened the relations
with Pierronne, only Pierronne had left Pierron and Lydie with her
mother, and set out early in the morning to spend the day with a cousin
at Marchiennes; and they joked, for they knew this cousin; she had a
moustache, and was head captain at the Voreux. Maheude declared that it
was not proper to leave one's family on a feast-day Sunday.

Beside the rabbit with potatoes, a rabbit which had been fattening
in the shed for a month, the Maheus had meat soup and beef. The
fortnight's wages had just fallen due the day before. They could not
recollect such a spread. Even at the last St. Barbara's Day, the fete
of the miners when they do nothing for three days, the rabbit had
not been so fat nor so tender. So the ten pairs of jaws, from little
Estelle, whose teeth were beginning to appear, to old Bonnemort,
who was losing his, worked so heartily that the bones themselves
disappeared. The meat was good, but they could not digest it well; they
saw it too seldom. Everything disappeared; there only remained a piece
of boiled beef for the evening. They could add bread and butter if they
were hungry.

Jeanlin went out first. Bbert was waiting for him behind the school,
and they prowled about for a long time before they were able to entice
away Lydie, whom Brul, who had decided not to go out, was trying
to keep with her. When she perceived that the child had fled, she
shouted and brandished her lean arms, while Pierron, annoyed at the
disturbance, strolled quietly away with the air of a husband who can
amuse himself with a good conscience, knowing that his wife also has
her little amusements.

Old Bonnemort set out at last, and Maheu decided to have a little fresh
air after asking Maheude if she would come and join him down below.
No, she couldn't at all, it was nothing but drudgery with the little
ones; but perhaps she would, all the same; she would think about it:
they could easily find each other. When he got outside he hesitated,
then he went into the neighbours' to see if Levaque was ready. There he
found Zacharie, who was waiting for Philomne, and the Levaque woman
started again on that everlasting subject of marriage, saying that
she was being made fun of and that she would have an explanation with
Maheude once and for all. Was life worth living when one had to keep
one's daughter's fatherless children while she went off with her lover?
Philomne quietly finished putting on her bonnet, and Zacharie took
her off, saying that he was quite willing if his mother was willing.
As Levaque had already gone, Maheu referred his angry neighbour to his
wife and hastened to depart. Bouteloup, who was finishing a fragment of
cheese with both elbows on the table, obstinately refused the friendly
offer of a glass. He would stay in the house like a good husband.

Gradually the settlement was emptied; all the men went off one behind
the other, while the girls, watching at the doors, set out in the
opposite direction on the arms of their lovers. As her father turned
the corner of the church, Catherine perceived Chaval, and, hastening to
join him, they took together the Montsou road. And the mother remained
alone, in the midst of her scattered children, without strength to
leave her chair, where she was pouring out a second glass of boiling
coffee, which she drank in little sips. In the settlement there were
only the women left, inviting each other to finish the dregs of the
coffee-pots, around tables that were still warm and greasy with the
dinner.

Maheu had guessed that Levaque was at the Avantage, and he slowly
went down to Rasseneur's. In fact, behind the bar, in the little
garden shut in by a hedge, Levaque was having a game of skittles with
some mates. Standing by, and not playing, Father Bonnemort and old
Mouque were following the ball, so absorbed that they even forgot to
nudge each other with their elbows. A burning sun struck down on them
perpendicularly; there was only one streak of shade by the side of the
inn; and tienne was there drinking his glass before a table, annoyed
because Souvarine had just left him to go up to his room. Nearly every
Sunday the engine-man shut himself up to write or to read.

"Will you have a game?" asked Levaque of Maheu.

But he refused: it was too hot, he was already dying of thirst.

"Rasseneur," called tienne, "bring a glass, will you?"

And turning towards Maheu:

"I'll stand it, you know."

They now all treated each other familiarly. Rasseneur did not hurry
himself, he had to be called three times; and Madame Rasseneur at last
brought some lukewarm beer. The young man had lowered his voice to
complain about the house: they were worthy people, certainly, people
with good ideas, but the beer was worthless and the soup abominable!
He would have changed his lodgings ten times over, only the thought of
the walk from Montsou held him back. One day or another he would go and
live with some family at the settlement.

"Sure enough!" said Maheu in his slow voice, "sure enough, you would be
better in a family."

But shouts now broke out. Levaque had overthrown all the skittles at
one stroke. Mouque and Bonnemort, with their faces towards the ground,
in the midst of the tumult preserved a silence of profound approbation.
And the joy at this stroke found vent in jokes, especially when the
players perceived Mouquette's radiant face behind the hedge. She had
been prowling about there for an hour, and at last ventured to come
near on hearing the laughter.

"What! are you alone?" shouted Levaque. "Where are your sweethearts?"

"My sweethearts! I've stabled them," she replied, with a fine impudent
gaiety. "I'm looking for one."

They all offered themselves, throwing coarse chaff at her. She refused
with a gesture and laughed louder, playing the fine lady. Besides, her
father was watching the game without even taking his eyes from the
fallen skittles.

"Ah!" Levaque went on, throwing a look towards tienne: "one can tell
where you're casting sheep's eyes, my girl! You'll have to take him by
force."

Then tienne brightened up. It was in fact around him that the putter
was revolving. And he refused, amused indeed, but without having the
least desire for her. She remained planted behind the hedge for some
minutes longer, looking at him with large fixed eyes; then she slowly
went away, and her face suddenly became serious as if she were overcome
by the powerful sun.

In a low voice tienne was again giving long explanations to Maheu
regarding the necessity for the Montsou miners to establish a Provident
Fund. "Since the Company professes to leave us free," he repeated,
"what is there to fear? We only have their pensions and they distribute
them according to their own idea, since they don't hold back any of our
pay. Well, it will be prudent to form, outside their good pleasure, an
association of mutual help on which we can count at least in cases of
immediate need."

And he gave details, and discussed the organization, promising to
undertake the labour of it.

"I am willing enough," said Maheu, at last convinced. "But there are
the others; get them to make up their minds."

Levaque had won, and they left the skittles to empty their glasses. But
Maheu refused to drink a second glass; he would see later on, the day
was not yet done. He was thinking about Pierron. Where could he be?
No doubt at the Lenfant Estaminet. And, having persuaded tienne and
Levaque, the three set out for Montsou, at the same moment that a new
band took possession of the skittles at the Avantage.

On the road they had to pause at the Casimir Bar, and then at the
Estaminet du Progrs. Comrades called them through the open doors, and
there was no way of refusing. Each time it was a glass, two if they
were polite enough to return the invitation. They remained there ten
minutes, exchanging a few words, and then began again, a little farther
on, knowing the beer, with which they could fill themselves without any
other discomfort than having to piss it out again in the same measure,
as clear as rock water. At the Estaminet Lenfant they came right upon
Pierron, who was finishing his second glass, and who, in order not to
refuse to touch glasses, swallowed a third. They naturally drank theirs
also. Now there were four of them, and they set out to see if Zacharie
was not at the Estaminet Tison. It was empty, and they called for a
glass, in order to wait for him a moment. Then they thought of the
Estaminet Saint-loi and accepted there a round from Captain Richomme.
Then they rambled from bar to bar, without any pretext, simply saying
that they were having a stroll.

"We must go to the Volcan!" suddenly said Levaque, who was getting
excited.

The others began to laugh, and hesitated. Then they accompanied their
comrade in the midst of the growing crowd. In the long narrow room of
the Volcan, on a platform raised at the end, five singers, the scum
of the Lille prostitutes, were walking about, low-necked and with
monstrous gestures, and the customers gave ten sous when they desired
to have one behind the stage. There was especially a number of putters
and landers, even trammers of fourteen, all the youth of the pit,
drinking more gin than beer. A few old miners also ventured there, and
the worst husbands of the settlements, those whose households were
falling into ruin.

As soon as the band was seated round a little table, tienne took
possession of Levaque to explain to him his idea of the Provident
Fund. Like all new converts who have found a mission, he had become an
obstinate propagandist.

"Every member," he repeated, "could easily pay in twenty sous a month.
As these twenty sous accumulated they would form a nice little sum
in four or five years, and when one has money one is ready, eh, for
anything that turns up? Eh, what do you say to it?"

"I've nothing to say against it," replied Levaque, with an abstracted
air. "We will talk about it."

He was excited by an enormous blonde, and determined to remain behind
when Maheu and Pierron, after drinking their glasses, set out without
waiting for a second song.

Outside, tienne who had gone with them found Mouquette, who seemed to
be following them. She was always there, looking at him with her large
fixed eyes, laughing her good-natured laugh, as if to say: "Are you
willing?" The young man joked and shrugged his shoulders. Then, with a
gesture of anger, she was lost in the crowd.

"Where, then, is Chaval?" asked Pierron.

"True!" said Maheu. "He must surely be at Piquette's. Let us go to
Piquette's."

But as they all three arrived at the Estaminet Piquette, sounds of
a quarrel arrested them at the door; Zacharie with his fist was
threatening a thick-set phlegmatic Walloon nail-maker, while Chaval,
with his hands in his pockets, was looking on.

"Hullo! there's Chaval," said Maheu quietly; "he is with Catherine."

For five long hours the putter and her lover had been walking about
the fair. All along the Montsou road, that wide road with low bedaubed
houses winding downhill, a crowd of people wandered up and down in the
sun, like a trail of ants, lost in the flat, bare plain. The eternal
black mud had dried, a black dust was rising and floating about like a
storm-cloud.

On both sides the public-houses were crowded; there were rows of tables
to the street, where stood a double rank of hucksters at stalls in
the open air, selling neck-handkerchiefs and looking-glasses for the
girls, knives and caps for the lads; to say nothing of sweetmeats,
sugar-plums, and biscuits. In front of the church archery was going on.
Opposite the Yards they were playing at bowls. At the corner of the
Joiselle road, beside the Administration buildings, in a spot enclosed
by fences, crowds were watching a cock-fight, two large red cocks,
armed with steel spurs, their breasts torn and bleeding. Farther on, at
Maigrat's, aprons and trousers were being won at billiards. And there
were long silences; the crowd drank and stuffed itself without a sound;
a mute indigestion of beer and fried potatoes was expanding in the
great heat, still further increased by the frying-pans bubbling in the
open air.

Chaval bought a looking-glass for nineteen sous and a handkerchief
for three francs, to give to Catherine. At every turn they met Mouque
and Bonnemort, who had come to the fair and, in meditative mood, were
plodding heavily through it side by side. Another meeting made them
angry; they caught sight of Jeanlin inciting Bbert and Lydie to steal
bottles of gin from an extemporized bar installed at the edge of an
open piece of ground. Catherine succeeded in boxing her brother's ears;
the little girl had already run away with a bottle. These imps of Satan
would certainly end in a prison. Then, as they arrived before another
bar, the Tte-Coupe, it occurred to Chaval to take his sweetheart
in to a competition of chaffinches which had been announced on the
door for the past week. Fifteen nail-makers from the Marchiennes nail
works had responded to the appeal, each with a dozen cages; and the
gloomy little cages in which the blinded finches sat motionless were
already hung upon a paling in the inn yard. It was a question as to
which, in the course of an hour, should repeat the phrase of its song
the greatest number of times. Each nail-maker with a slate stood near
his cages to mark, watching his neighbours and watched by them. And
the chaffinches had begun, the _chichoueux_ with the deeper
note, the _batisecouics_ with their shriller note, all at first
timid, and only risking a rare phrase, then, excited by each other's
songs, increasing the pace; then at last carried away by such a rage
of rivalry that they would even fall dead. The nail-makers violently
whipped them on with their voices, shouting out to them in Walloon to
sing more, still more, yet a little more, while the spectators, about
a hundred people, stood by in mute fascination in the midst of this
infernal music of a hundred and eighty chaffinches all repeating the
same cadence out of time. It was a _batisecouic_ which gained the
first prize, a metal coffee-pot.

Catherine and Chaval were there when Zacharie and Philomne entered.
They shook hands, and all stayed together. But suddenly Zacharie
became angry, for he discovered that a nail-maker, who had come in
with his mates out of curiosity, was pinching his sister's thigh. She
blushed and tried to make him be silent, trembling at the idea that all
these nail-makers would throw themselves on Chaval and kill him if he
objected to her being pinched. She had felt the pinch, but said nothing
out of prudence. Her lover, however, merely made a grimace, and as they
all four now went out the affair seemed to be finished. But hardly
had they entered Piquette's to drink a glass, when the nail-maker
reappeared, making fun of them and coming close up to them with an air
of provocation. Zacharie, insulted in his good family feelings, threw
himself on the insolent intruder.

"That's my sister, you swine! Just wait a bit, and I'm damned if I
don't make you respect her."

The two men were separated, while Chaval, who was quite calm, only
repeated:

"Let be! it's my concern. I tell you I don't care a damn for him."

Maheu now arrived with his party, and quieted Catherine and Philomne
who were in tears. The nail-maker had disappeared, and there was
laughter in the crowd. To bring the episode to an end, Chaval, who
was at home at the Estaminet Piquette, called for drinks. tienne had
touched glasses with Catherine, and all drank together--the father,
the daughter and her lover, the son and his mistress--saying politely:
"To your good health!" Pierron afterwards persisted in paying for more
drinks. And they were all in good humour, when Zacharie grew wild again
at the sight of his comrade Mouquet, and called him, as he said, to go
and finish his affair with the nail-maker.

"I shall have to go and do for him! Here, Chaval, keep Philomne with
Catherine. I'm coming back."

Maheu offered drinks in his turn. After all, if the lad wished to
avenge his sister it was not a bad example. But as soon as she had seen
Mouquet, Philomne felt at rest, and nodded her head. Sure enough the
two chaps would be off to the Volcan!

On the evenings of feast-days the fair was terminated in the ball-room
of the Bon-Joyeux. It was a widow, Madame Dsir, who kept this
ball-room, a fat matron of fifty, as round as a tub, but so fresh that
she still had six lovers, one for every day of the week, she said, and
the six together for Sunday. She called all the miners her children;
and grew tender at the thought of the flood of beer which she had
poured out for them during the last thirty years; and she boasted also
that a putter never became pregnant without having first stretched her
legs at her establishment. There were two rooms in the Bon-Joyeux: the
bar which contained the counter and tables; then, communicating with
it on the same floor by a large arch, was the ball-room, a large hall
only planked in the middle, being paved with bricks round the sides.
It was decorated with two garlands of paper flowers which crossed one
another, and were united in the middle by a crown of the same flowers;
while along the walls were rows of gilt shields bearing the names of
saints--St. loi, patron of the iron-workers; St. Crispin, patron of
the shoemakers; St. Barbara, patron of the miners; the whole calendar
of corporations. The ceiling was so low that the three musicians on
their platform, which was about the size of a pulpit, knocked their
heads against it. When it became dark four petroleum lamps were
fastened to the four corners of the room.

On this Sunday there was dancing from five o'clock with the full
daylight through the windows, but it was not until towards seven
that the rooms began to fill. Outside, a gale was rising, blowing
great black showers of dust which blinded people and sleeted into
the frying-pans. Maheu, tienne, and Pierron, having come in to sit
down, had found Chaval at the Bon-Joyeux dancing with Catherine, while
Philomne by herself was looking on. Neither Levaque nor Zacharie had
reappeared. As there were no benches around the ball-room, Catherine
came after each dance to rest at her father's table. They called
Philomne, but she preferred to stand up. The twilight was coming on;
the three musicians played furiously; one could only see in the hall
the movement of hips and breasts in the midst of a confusion of arms.
The appearance of the four lamps was greeted noisily, and suddenly
everything was lit up--the red faces, the dishevelled hair sticking
to the skin, the flying skirts spreading abroad the strong odour of
perspiring couples. Maheu pointed out Mouquette to tienne: she was as
round and greasy as a bladder of lard, revolving violently in the arms
of a tall, lean lander. She had been obliged to console herself and
take a man.

At last, at eight o'clock, Maheude appeared with Estelle at her breast,
followed by Alzire, Henri, and Lnore. She had come there straight
to her husband without fear of missing him. They could sup later on;
as yet nobody was hungry, with their stomachs soaked in coffee and
thickened with beer. Other women came in, and they whispered together
when they saw, behind Maheude, the Levaque woman enter with Bouteloup,
who led in by the hand Achille and Dsire, Philomne's little ones.
The two neighbours seemed to be getting on well together, one turning
round to chat with the other. On the way there had been a great
explanation, and Maheude had resigned herself to Zacharie's marriage,
in despair at the loss of her eldest son's wages, but overcome by the
thought that she could not hold it back any longer without injustice.
She was trying, therefore, to put a good face on it, though with an
anxious heart, as a housekeeper who was asking herself how she could
make both ends meet now that the best part of her purse was going.

"Place yourself there, neighbour," she said, pointing to a table near
that where Maheu was drinking with tienne and Pierron.

"Is not my husband with you?" asked the Levaque woman.

The others told her that he would soon come. They were all seated
together in a heap, Bouteloup and the youngsters so tightly squeezed
among the drinkers that the two tables only formed one. There was a
call for drinks. Seeing her mother and her children Philomne had
decided to come near. She accepted a chair, and seemed pleased to hear
that she was at last to be married; then, as they were looking for
Zacharie, she replied in her soft voice:

"I am waiting for him; he is over there."

Maheu had exchanged a look with his wife. She had then consented? He
became serious and smoked in silence. He also felt anxiety for the
morrow in face of the ingratitude of these children, who got married
one by one leaving their parents in wretchedness.

The dancing still went on, and the end of a quadrille drowned the
ball-room in red dust; the walls cracked, a cornet produced shrill
whistling sounds like a locomotive in distress; and when the dancers
stopped they were smoking like horses.

"Do you remember?" said the Levaque woman, bending towards Maheude's
ear; "you talked of strangling Catherine if she did anything foolish!"

Chaval brought Catherine back to the family table, and both of them
standing behind the father finished their glasses.

"Bah!" murmured Maheude, with an air of resignation, "one says things
like that--. But what quiets me is that she will not have a child; I
feel sure of that. You see if she is confined, and obliged to marry,
what shall we do for a living then?"

Now the cornet was whistling a polka, and as the deafening noise began
again, Maheu, in a low voice, communicated an idea to his wife. Why
should they not take a lodger? tienne, for example, who was looking
out for quarters? They would have room since Zacharie was going to
leave them, and the money that they would lose in that direction would
be in part regained in the other. Maheude's face brightened; certainly
it was a good idea, it must be arranged. She seemed to be saved from
starvation once more, and her good humour returned so quickly that she
ordered a new round of drinks.

tienne, meanwhile, was seeking to indoctrinate Pierron, to whom he was
explaining his plan of a Provident Fund. He had made him promise to
subscribe, when he was imprudent enough to reveal his real aim.

"And if we go out on strike you can see how useful that fund will be.
We can snap our fingers at the Company, we shall have there a fund to
fight against them. Eh? don't you think so?"

Pierron lowered his eyes and grew pale; he stammered:

"I'll think over it. Good conduct, that's the best Provident Fund."

Then Maheu took possession of tienne, and squarely, like a good man,
proposed to take him as a lodger. The young man accepted at once,
anxious to live in the settlement with the idea of being nearer to his
mates. The matter was settled in three words, Maheude declaring that
they would wait for the marriage of the children.

Just then, Zacharie at last came back, with Mouquet and Levaque. The
three brought in the odours of the Volcan, a breath of gin, a musky
acidity of ill-kept girls. They were very tipsy and seemed well pleased
with themselves, digging their elbows into each other and grinning.
When he knew that he was at last to be married Zacharie began to laugh
so loudly that he choked. Philomne peacefully declared that she would
rather see him laugh than cry. As there were no more chairs, Bouteloup
had moved so as to give up half of his to Levaque. And the latter,
suddenly much affected by realizing that the whole family party was
there, once more had beer served out.

"By the Lord! we don't amuse ourselves so often!" he roared.

They remained there till ten o'clock. Women continued to arrive, either
to join or to take away their men; bands of children followed in rows,
and the mothers no longer troubled themselves, pulling out their long
pale breasts, like sacks of oats, and smearing their chubby babies with
milk; while the little ones who were already able to walk, gorged with
beer and on all fours beneath the table, relieved themselves without
shame. It was a rising sea of beer, from Madame Dsir's disembowelled
barrels, the beer enlarged every belly, flowing from noses, eyes, and
everywhere. So puffed out was the crowd that every one had a shoulder
or knee poking into his neighbour; all were cheerful and merry in thus
feeling each other's elbows. A continuous laugh kept their mouths open
from ear to ear. The heat was like an oven; they were roasting and felt
themselves at ease with glistening skin, gilded in a thick smoke from
the pipes; the only discomfort was when one had to move away; from time
to time a girl rose, went to the other end, near the pump, lifted her
clothes, and then came back. Beneath the garlands of painted paper the
dancers could no longer see each other, they perspired so much; this
encouraged the trammers to tumble the putters over, catching them at
random by the hips. But where a girl tumbled with a man over her, the
cornet covered their fall with its furious music; the swirl of feet
wrapped them round as if the ball had collapsed upon them.

Someone who was passing warned Pierron that his daughter Lydie was
sleeping at the door, across the pavement. She had drunk her share
of the stolen bottle and was tipsy. He had to carry her away in his
arms while Jeanlin and Bbert, who were more sober, followed him
behind, thinking it a great joke. This was the signal for departure,
and several families came out of the Bon-Joyeux, the Maheus and the
Levaques deciding to return to the settlement. At the same moment
Father Bonnemort and old Mouque also left Montsou, walking in the
same somnambulistic manner, preserving the obstinate silence of their
recollections. And they all went back together, passing for the last
time through the fair, where the frying-pans were coagulating, and by
the estaminets, from which the last glasses were flowing in a stream
towards the middle of the road. The storm was still threatening, and
sounds of laughter arose as they left the lighted houses to lose
themselves in the dark country around. Panting breaths arose from the
ripe wheat; many children must have been made on that night. They
arrived in confusion at the settlement. Neither the Levaques nor the
Maheus supped with appetite, and the latter kept on dropping off to
sleep while finishing their morning's boiled beef.

tienne had led away Chaval for one more drink at Rasseneur's.

"I am with you!" said Chaval, when his mate had explained the matter of
the Provident Fund. "Put it there! you're a fine fellow!"

The beginning of drunkenness was flaming in tienne's eyes. He
exclaimed:

"Yes, let's join hands. As for me, you know I would give up everything
for the sake of justice, both drink and girls. There's only one thing
that warms my heart, and that is the thought that we are going to sweep
away these bourgeois."




CHAPTER III


Towards the middle of August, tienne settled with the Maheus, Zacharie
having married and obtained from the Company a vacant house in the
settlement for Philomne and the two children. During the first days,
the young man experienced some constraint in the presence of Catherine.
There was a constant intimacy, as he everywhere replaced the elder
brother, sharing Jeanlin's bed over against the big sister's. Going to
bed and getting up he had to dress and undress near her, and see her
take off and put on her garments. When the last skirt fell from her,
she appeared of pallid whiteness, that transparent snow of anaemic
blondes; and he experienced a constant emotion in finding her, with
hands and face already spoilt, as white as if dipped in milk from her
heels to her neck, where the line of tan stood out sharply like a
necklace of amber. He pretended to turn away; but little by little he
knew her: the feet at first which his lowered eyes met; then a glimpse
of a knee when she slid beneath the coverlet; then her bosom with
little rigid breasts as she leant over the bowl in the morning. She
would hasten without looking at him, and in ten seconds was undressed
and stretched beside Alzire, with so supple and snake-like a movement
that he had scarcely taken off his shoes when she disappeared, turning
her back and only showing her heavy knot of hair.

She never had any reason to be angry with him. If a sort of obsession
made him watch her in spite of himself at the moment when she lay down,
he avoided all practical jokes or dangerous pastimes. The parents were
there, and besides he still had for her a feeling, half of friendship
and half of spite, which prevented him from treating her as a girl to
be desired, in the midst of the abandonment of their now common life in
dressing, at meals, during work, where nothing of them remained secret,
not even their most intimate needs. All the modesty of the family had
taken refuge in the daily bath, for which the young girl now went
upstairs alone, while the men bathed below one after the other.

At the end of the first month, tienne and Catherine seemed no longer
to see each other when in the evening, before extinguishing the candle,
they moved about the room, undressed. She had ceased to hasten, and
resumed her old custom of doing up her hair at the edge of her bed,
while her arms, raised in the air, lifted her chemise to her thighs,
and he, without his trousers, sometimes helped her, looking for the
hairpins that she had lost. Custom killed the shame of being naked;
they found it natural to be like this, for they were doing no harm, and
it was not their fault if there was only one room for so many people.
Sometimes, however, a trouble came over them suddenly, at moments when
they had no guilty thought. After some nights when he had not seen
her pale body, he suddenly saw her white all over, with a whiteness
which shook him with a shiver, which obliged him to turn away for fear
of yielding to the desire to take her. On other evenings, without
any apparent reason, she would be overcome by a panic of modesty and
hasten to slip between the sheets as if she felt the hands of this lad
seizing her. Then, when the candle was out, they both knew that they
were not sleeping but were thinking of each other in spite of their
weariness. This made them restless and sulky all the following day;
they liked best the tranquil evenings when they could behave together
like comrades.

tienne only complained of Jeanlin, who slept curled up. Alzire
slept lightly, and Lnore and Henri were found in the morning, in
each other's arms, exactly as they had gone to sleep. In the dark
house there was no other sound than the snoring of Maheu and Maheude,
rolling out at regular intervals like a forge bellows. On the whole,
tienne was better off than at Rasseneur's; the bed was tolerable and
the sheets were changed every month. He had better soup, too, and
only suffered from the rarity of meat. But they were all in the same
condition, and for forty-five francs he could not demand rabbit to
every meal. These forty-five francs helped the family and enabled them
to make both ends meet, though always leaving some small debts and
arrears; so the Maheus were grateful to their lodger; his linen was
washed and mended, his buttons sewn on, and his affairs kept in order;
in fact he felt all around him a woman's neatness and care.

It was at this time that tienne began to understand the ideas
that were buzzing in his brain. Up till then he had only felt an
instinctive revolt in the midst of the inarticulate fermentation among
his mates. All sorts of confused questions came before him: Why are
some miserable? why are others rich? why are the former beneath the
heel of the latter without hope of ever taking their place? And his
first stage was to understand his ignorance. A secret shame, a hidden
annoyance, gnawed him from that time; he knew nothing, he dared not
talk about these things which were working in him like a passion--the
equality of all men, and the equity which demanded a fair division
of the earth's wealth. He thus took to the methodless study of those
who in ignorance feel the fascination of knowledge. He now kept up a
regular correspondence with Pluchart, who was better educated than
himself and more advanced in the Socialist movement. He had books sent
to him, and his ill-digested reading still further excited his brain,
especially a medical book entitled _Hygine du Mineur_, in which
a Belgian doctor had summed up the evils of which the people in coal
mines were dying; without counting treatises on political economy,
incomprehensible in their technical dryness, Anarchist pamphlets which
upset his ideas, and old numbers of newspapers which he preserved as
irrefutable arguments for possible discussions. Souvarine also lent him
books, and the work on Co-operative Societies had made him dream for a
month of a universal exchange association abolishing money and basing
the whole social life on work. The shame of his ignorance left him, and
a certain pride came to him now that he felt himself thinking.

During these first months tienne retained the ecstasy of a novice; his
heart was bursting with generous indignation against the oppressors,
and looking forward to the approaching triumph of the oppressed.
He had not yet manufactured a system, his reading had been too
vague. Rasseneur's practical demands were mixed up in his mind with
Souvarine's violent and destructive methods, and when he came out of
the Avantage, where he was to be found nearly every day railing with
them against the Company, he walked as if in a dream, assisting at
a radical regeneration of nations to be effected without one broken
window or a single drop of blood. The methods of execution remained
obscure; he preferred to think that things would go very well, for
he lost his head as soon as he tried to formulate a programme of
reconstruction. He even showed himself full of illogical moderation;
he often said that we must banish politics from the social question, a
phrase which he had read and which seemed a useful one to repeat among
the phlegmatic colliers with whom he lived.

Every evening now, at the Maheus', they delayed half an hour before
going up to bed. tienne always introduced the same subject. As his
nature became more refined he found himself wounded by the promiscuity
of the settlement. Were they beasts to be thus penned together in the
midst of the fields, so tightly packed that one could not change one's
shirt without exhibiting one's backside to the neighbours? And how
bad it was for health; and boys and girls were forced to grow corrupt
together.

"Lord!" replied Maheu, "if there were more money there would be more
comfort. All the same it's true enough that it's good for no one to
live piled up like that. It always ends with making the men drunk and
the girls big-bellied."

And the family began to talk, each having his say, while the petroleum
lamp vitiated the air of the room, already stinking of fried onion. No,
life was certainly not a joke. One had to work like a brute at labour
which was once a punishment for convicts; one left one's skin there
oftener than was one's turn, all that without even getting meat on the
table in the evening. No doubt one had one's feed; one ate, indeed, but
so little, just enough to suffer without dying, overcome with debts and
pursued as if one had stolen the bread. When Sunday came one slept from
weariness. The only pleasures were to get drunk and to get a child with
one's wife; then the beer swelled the belly, and the child, later on,
left you to go to the dogs. No, it was certainly not a joke.

Then Maheude joined in.

"The bother is, you see, when you have to say to yourself that it won't
change. When you're young you think that happiness will come some time,
you hope for things; and then the wretchedness begins always over
again, and you get shut up in it. Now, I don't wish harm to any one,
but there are times when this injustice makes me mad."

There was silence; they were all breathing with the vague discomfort
of this closed-in horizon. Father Bonnemort only, if he was there,
opened his eyes with surprise, for in his time people used not to worry
about things; they were born in the coal and they hammered at the seam,
without asking for more; while now there was an air stirring which made
the colliers ambitious.

"It don't do to spit at anything," he murmured. "A good glass is a good
glass. As to the masters, they're often rascals; but there always will
be masters, won't there? What's the use of racking your brains over
those things?"

tienne at once became animated. What! The worker was to be forbidden
to think! Why! that was just it; things would change now because the
worker had begun to think. In the old man's time the miner lived in
the mine like a brute, like a machine for extracting coal, always
under the earth, with ears and eyes stopped to outward events. So
the rich, who governed, found it easy to sell him and buy him, and
to devour his flesh; he did not even know what was going on. But now
the miner was waking up down there, germinating in the earth just as
a grain germinates; and some fine day he would spring up in the midst
of the fields: yes, men would spring up, an army of men who would
re-establish justice. Is it not true that all citizens are equal since
the Revolution, because they vote together? Why should the worker
remain the slave of the master who pays him? The big companies with
their machines were crushing everything, and one no longer had against
them the ancient guarantees when people of the same trade, united in a
body, were able to defend themselves. It was for that, by God, and for
no other reason, that all would burst up one day, thanks to education.
One had only to look into the settlement itself: the grandfathers could
not sign their names, the fathers could do so, and as for the sons,
they read and wrote like schoolmasters. Ah! it was springing up, it was
springing up, little by little, a rough harvest of men who would ripen
in the sun! From the moment when they were no longer each of them stuck
to his place for his whole existence, and when they had the ambition to
take a neighbour's place, why should they not hit out with their fists
and try for the mastery?

Maheu was shaken but remained full of doubts.

"As soon as you move they give you back your certificate," he said.
"The old man is right; it will always be the miner who gets all the
trouble, without a chance of a leg of mutton now and then as a reward."

Maheude, who had been silent for a while, awoke as from a dream.

"But if what the priests tell is true, if the poor people in this world
become the rich ones in the next!"

A burst of laughter interrupted her; even the children shrugged their
shoulders, being incredulous in the open air, keeping a secret fear of
ghosts in the pit, but glad of the empty sky.

"Ah! bosh! the priests!" exclaimed Maheu. "If they believed that,
they'd eat less and work more, so as to reserve a better place for
themselves up there. No, when one's dead, one's dead."

Maheude sighed deeply.

"Oh, Lord, Lord!"

Then her hands fell on to her knees with a gesture of immense dejection:

"Then if that's true, we are done for, we are."

They all looked at one another. Father Bonnemort spat into his
handkerchief, while Maheu sat with his extinguished pipe, which he had
forgotten, in his mouth. Alzire listened between Lnore and Henri,
who were sleeping on the edge of the table. But Catherine, with her
chin in her hand, never took her large clear eyes off tienne while he
was protesting, declaring his faith, and opening out the enchanting
future of his social dream. Around them the settlement was asleep; one
only heard the stray cries of a child or the complaints of a belated
drunkard. In the parlour the clock ticked slowly, and a damp freshness
arose from the sanded floor in spite of the stuffy air.

"Fine ideas!" said the young man; "why do you need a good God and his
paradise to make you happy? Haven't you got it in your own power to
make yourselves happy on earth?"

With his enthusiastic voice he spoke on and on. The closed horizon was
bursting out; a gap of light was opening in the sombre lives of these
poor people. The eternal wretchedness, beginning over and over again,
the brutalizing labour, the fate of a beast who gives his wool and
has his throat cut, all the misfortune disappeared, as though swept
away by a great flood of sunlight; and beneath the dazzling gleam of
fairyland justice descended from heaven. Since the good God was dead,
justice would assure the happiness of men, and equality and brotherhood
would reign. A new society would spring up in a day just as in dreams,
an immense town with the splendour of a mirage, in which each citizen
lived by his work, and took his share in the common joys. The old
rotten world had fallen to dust; a young humanity purged from its
crimes formed but a single nation of workers, having for their motto:
"To each according to his deserts, and to each desert according to its
performance." And this dream grew continually larger and more beautiful
and more seductive as it mounted higher in the impossible.

At first Maheude refused to listen, possessed by a deep dread. No, no,
it was too beautiful; it would not do to embark upon these ideas, for
they made life seem abominable afterwards, and one would have destroyed
everything in the effort to be happy. When she saw Maheu's eyes shine,
and that he was troubled and won over, she became restless, and
exclaimed, interrupting tienne:

"Don't listen, my man! You can see he's only telling us fairy-tales. Do
you think the bourgeois would ever consent to work as we do?"

But little by little the charm worked on her also. Her imagination was
aroused and she smiled at last, entering his marvellous world of hope.
It was so sweet to forget for a while the sad reality! When one lives
like the beasts with face bent towards the earth, one needs a corner
of falsehood where one can amuse oneself by regaling on the things one
will never possess. And what made her enthusiastic and brought her into
agreement with the young man was the idea of justice.

"Now, there you're right!" she exclaimed. "When a thing's just I don't
mind being cut to pieces for it. And it's true enough! it would be just
for us to have a turn."

Then Maheu ventured to become excited.

"Blast it all! I am not rich, but I would give five francs to keep
alive to see that. What a hustling, eh? Will it be soon? And how can we
set about it?"

tienne began talking again. The old social system was cracking; it
could not last more than a few months, he affirmed roundly. As to the
methods of execution, he spoke more vaguely, mixing up his reading,
and fearing before ignorant hearers to enter on explanations where he
might lose himself. All the systems had their share in it, softened by
the certainty of easy triumph, a universal kiss which would bring to an
end all class misunderstandings; without taking count, however, of the
thick-heads among the masters and bourgeois whom it would perhaps be
necessary to bring to reason by force. And the Maheus looked as if they
understood, approving and accepting miraculous solutions with the blind
faith of new believers, like those Christians of the early days of the
Church, who awaited the coming of a perfect society on the dunghill of
the ancient world. Little Alzire picked up a few words, and imagined
happiness under the form of a very warm house, where children could
play and eat as long as they liked. Catherine, without moving, her chin
always resting in her hand, kept her eyes fixed on tienne, and when he
stopped a slight shudder passed over her, and she was quite pale as if
she felt the cold.

But Maheude looked at the clock.

"Past nine! Can it be possible? We shall never get up to-morrow."

And the Maheus left the table with hearts ill at ease and in despair.
It seemed to them that they had just been rich and that they had now
suddenly fallen back into the mud. Father Bonnemort, who was setting
out for the pit, growled that those sort of stories wouldn't make the
soup better; while the others went upstairs in single file, noticing
the dampness of the walls and the pestiferous stuffiness of the air.
Upstairs, amid the heavy slumber of the settlement when Catherine had
got into bed last and blown out the candle, tienne heard her tossing
feverishly before getting to sleep.

Often at these conversations the neighbours came in: Levaque, who
grew excited at the idea of a general sharing; Pierron, who prudently
went to bed as soon as they attacked the Company. At long intervals
Zacharie came in for a moment; but politics bored him, he preferred to
go off and drink a glass at the Avantage. As to Chaval, he would go to
extremes and wanted to draw blood. Nearly every evening he passed an
hour with the Maheus; in this assiduity there was a certain unconfessed
jealousy, the fear that he would be robbed of Catherine. This girl, of
whom he was already growing tired, had become precious to him now that
a man slept near her and could take her at night.

tienne's influence increased; he gradually revolutionized the
settlement. His propaganda was unseen, and all the more sure since he
was growing in the estimation of all. Maheude, notwithstanding the
caution of a prudent housekeeper, treated him with consideration, as
a young man who paid regularly and neither drank nor gambled, with
his nose always in a book; she spread abroad his reputation among the
neighbours as an educated lad, a reputation which they abused by asking
him to write their letters. He was a sort of business man, charged with
correspondence and consulted by households in affairs of difficulty.
Since September he had thus at last been able to establish his famous
Provident Fund, which was still very precarious, only including the
inhabitants of the settlement; but he hoped to be able to obtain the
adhesion of the miners at all the pits, especially if the Company,
which had remained passive, continued not to interfere. He had been
made secretary of the association and he even received a small salary
for the clerking. This made him almost rich. If a married miner can
with difficulty make both ends meet, a sober lad who has no burdens can
even manage to save.

From this time a slow transformation took place in tienne. Certain
instincts of refinement and comfort which had slept during his poverty
were now revealed. He began to buy cloth garments; he also bought
a pair of elegant boots; he became a big man. The whole settlement
grouped round him. The satisfaction of his self-love was delicious;
he became intoxicated with this first enjoyment of popularity; to be
at the head of others, to command, he who was so young, and but the
day before had been a mere labourer, this filled him with pride, and
enlarged his dream of an approaching revolution in which he was to play
a part. His face changed: he became serious and put on airs, while
his growing ambition inflamed his theories and pushed him to ideas of
violence.

But autumn was advancing, and the October cold had blighted the
little gardens of the settlement. Behind the thin lilacs the trammers
no longer tumbled the putters over on the shed, and only the winter
vegetables remained, the cabbages pearled with white frost, the leeks
and the salads. Once more the rains were beating down on the red tiles
and flowing down into the tubs beneath the gutters with the sound of a
torrent. In every house the stove piled up with coal was never cold,
and poisoned the close parlours. It was the season of wretchedness
beginning once more.

In October, on one of the first frosty nights, tienne, feverish after
his conversation below, could not sleep. He had seen Catherine glide
beneath the coverlet and then blow out the candle. She also appeared
to be quite overcome, and tormented by one of those fits of modesty
which still made her hasten sometimes, and so awkwardly that she only
uncovered herself more. In the darkness she lay as though dead; but
he knew that she also was awake, and he felt that she was thinking of
him just as he was thinking of her: this mute exchange of their beings
had never before filled them with such trouble. The minutes went by
and neither he nor she moved, only their breathing was embarrassed in
spite of their efforts to retain it. Twice over he was on the point of
rising and taking her. It was idiotic to have such a strong desire for
each other and never to satisfy it. Why should they thus sulk against
what they desired? The children were asleep, she was quite willing; he
was certain that she was waiting for him, stifling, and that she would
close her arms round him in silence with clenched teeth. Nearly an hour
passed. He did not go to take her, and she did not turn round for fear
of calling him. The more they lived side by side, the more a barrier
was raised of shames, repugnancies, delicacies of friendship, which
they could not explain even to themselves.




CHAPTER IV


"Listen," said Maheude to her man, "when you go to Montsou for the pay,
just bring me back a pound of coffee and a kilo of sugar."

He was sewing one of his shoes, in order to spare the cobbling.

"Good!" he murmured, without leaving his task.

"I should like you to go to the butcher's too. A bit of veal, eh? It's
so long since we saw it."

This time he raised his head.

"Do you think, then, that I've got thousands coming in? The fortnight's
pay is too little as it is, with their confounded idea of always
stopping work."

They were both silent. It was after breakfast, one Saturday, at the end
of October. The Company, under the pretext of the derangement caused by
payment, had on this day once more suspended output in all their pits.
Seized by panic at the growing industrial crisis, and not wishing to
augment their already considerable stock, they profited by the smallest
pretexts to force their ten thousand workers to rest.

"You know that tienne is waiting for you at Rasseneur's," began
Maheude again. "Take him with you; he'll be more clever than you are in
clearing up matters if they haven't counted all your hours."

Maheu nodded approval.

"And just talk to those gentlemen about your father's affair. The
doctor's on good terms with the directors. It's true, isn't it, old un,
that the doctor's mistaken, and that you can still work?"

For ten days Father Bonnemort, with benumbed paws, as he said, had
remained nailed to his chair. She had to repeat her question, and he
growled:

"Sure enough, I can work. One isn't done for because one's legs are
bad. All that is just stories they make up, so as not to give the
hundred-and-eighty-franc pension."

Maheude thought of the old man's forty sous, which he would, perhaps,
never bring in any more, and she uttered a cry of anguish:

"My God! we shall soon be all dead if this goes on."

"When one is dead," said Maheu, "one doesn't get hungry."

He put some nails into his shoes, and decided to set out. The
Deux-Cent-Quarante settlement would not be paid till towards four
o'clock. The men did not hurry, therefore, but waited about, going off
one by one, beset by the women, who implored them to come back at once.
Many gave them commissions, to prevent them forgetting themselves in
public-houses.

At Rasseneur's tienne had received news. Disquieting rumours were
flying about; it was said that the Company were more and more
discontented over the timbering. They were overwhelming the workmen
with fines, and a conflict appeared inevitable. That was, however, only
the avowed dispute; beneath it there were grave and secret causes of
complication.

Just as tienne arrived, a comrade, who was drinking a glass on
his return from Montsou, was telling that an announcement had been
stuck up at the cashier's; but he did not quite know what was on the
announcement. A second entered, then a third, and each brought a
different story. It seemed certain, however, that the Company had taken
a resolution.

"What do you say about it, eh?" asked tienne, sitting down near
Souvarine at a table where nothing was to be seen but a packet of
tobacco.

The engine-man did not hurry, but finished rolling his cigarette.

"I say that it was easy to foresee. They want to push you to extremes."

He alone had a sufficiently keen intelligence to analyse the situation.
He explained it in his quiet way. The Company, suffering from the
crisis, had been forced to reduce their expenses if they were not to
succumb, and it was naturally the workers who would have to tighten
their bellies; under some pretext or another the Company would nibble
at their wages. For two months the coal had been remaining at the
surface of their pits, and nearly all the workshops were resting. As
the Company did not dare to rest in this way, terrified at the ruinous
inaction, they were meditating a middle course, perhaps a strike, from
which the miners would come out crushed and worse paid. Then the new
Provident Fund was disturbing them, as it was a threat for the future,
while a strike would relieve them of it, by exhausting it when it was
still small.

Rasseneur had seated himself beside tienne, and both of them were
listening in consternation. They could talk aloud, because there was no
one there but Madame Rasseneur, seated at the counter.

"What an idea!" murmured the innkeeper; "what's the good of it? The
Company has no interest in a strike, nor the men either. It would be
best to come to an understanding."

This was very sensible. He was always on the side of reasonable
demands. Since the rapid popularity of his old lodger, he had even
exaggerated this system of possible progress, saying they would
obtain nothing if they wished to have everything at once. In his fat,
good-humoured nature, nourished on beer, a secret jealousy was forming,
increased by the desertion of his bar, into which the workmen from
the Voreux now came more rarely to drink and to listen; and he thus
sometimes even began to defend the Company, forgetting the rancour of
an old miner who had been turned off.

"Then you are against the strike?" cried Madame Rasseneur, without
leaving the counter.

And as he energetically replied, "Yes!" she made him hold his tongue.

"Bah! you have no courage; let these gentlemen speak."

tienne was meditating, with his eyes fixed on the glass which she had
served to him. At last he raised his head.

"I dare say it's all true what our mate tells us, and we must get
resigned to this strike if they force it on us. Pluchart has just
written me some very sensible things on this matter. He's against the
strike too, for the men would suffer as much as the masters, and it
wouldn't come to anything decisive. Only it seems to him a capital
chance to get our men to make up their minds to go into his big
machine. Here's his letter."

In fact, Pluchart, in despair at the suspicion which the International
aroused among the miners at Montsou, was hoping to see them enter in a
mass if they were forced to fight against the Company. In spite of his
efforts, tienne had not been able to place a single member's card,
and he had given his best efforts to his Provident Fund, which was
much better received. But this fund was still so small that it would
be quickly exhausted, as Souvarine said, and the strikers would then
inevitably throw themselves into the Working Men's Association so that
their brothers in every country could come to their aid.

"How much have you in the fund?" asked Rasseneur. "Hardly three
thousand francs," replied tienne, "and you know that the directors
sent for me yesterday. Oh! they were very polite; they repeated that
they wouldn't prevent their men from forming a reserve fund. But I
quite understood that they wanted to control it. We are bound to have a
struggle over that."

The innkeeper was walking up and down, whistling contemptuously. "Three
thousand francs! what can you do with that! It wouldn't yield six days'
bread; and if we counted on foreigners, such as the people in England,
one might go to bed at once and turn up one's toes. No, it was too
foolish, this strike!"

Then for the first time bitter words passed between these two men who
usually agreed together at last, in their common hatred of capital.

"We shall see! and you, what do you say about it?" repeated tienne,
turning towards Souvarine.

The latter replied with his usual phrase of habitual contempt.

"A strike? Foolery!"

Then, in the midst of the angry silence, he added gently:

"On the whole, I shouldn't say no if it amuses you; it ruins the one
side and kills the other, and that is always so much cleared away. Only
in that way it will take quite a thousand years to renew the world.
Just begin by blowing up this prison in which you are all being done to
death!"

With his delicate hand he pointed out the Voreux, the buildings of
which could be seen through the open door. But an unforeseen drama
interrupted him: Poland, the big tame rabbit, which had ventured
outside, came bounding back, fleeing from the stones of a band of
trammers; and in her terror, with fallen ears and raised tail, she took
refuge against his legs, scratching and imploring him to take her up.
When he had placed her on his knees, he sheltered her with both hands,
and fell into that kind of dreamy somnolence into which the caress of
this soft warm fur always plunged him.

Almost at the same time Maheu came in. He would drink nothing, in spite
of the polite insistence of Madame Rasseneur, who sold her beer as
though she made a present of it. tienne had risen, and both of them
set out for Montsou.

On pay-day at the Company's Yards, Montsou seemed to be in the midst of
a fete as on fine Sunday feast-days. Bands of miners arrived from all
the settlements. The cashier's office being very small, they preferred
to wait at the door, stationed in groups on the pavement, barring the
way in a crowd that was constantly renewed. Hucksters profited by the
occasion and installed themselves with their movable stalls that sold
even pottery and cooked meats. But it was especially the estaminets
and the bars which did a good trade, for the miners before being paid
went to the counters to get patience, and returned to them to wet
their pay as soon as they had it in their pockets. But they were very
sensible, except when they finished it at the Volcan. As Maheu and
tienne advanced among the groups they felt that on that day a deep
exasperation was rising up. It was not the ordinary indifference with
which the money was taken and spent at the publics. Fists were clenched
and violent words were passing from mouth to mouth.

"Is it true, then," asked Maheu of Chaval, whom he met before the
Estaminet Piquette, "that they've played the dirty trick?"

But Chaval contented himself by replying with a furious growl, throwing
a sidelong look on tienne. Since the working had been renewed he had
hired himself on with others, more and more bitten by envy against this
comrade, the new-comer who posed as a boss and whose boots, as he said,
were licked by the whole settlement. This was complicated by a lover's
jealousy. He never took Catherine to Rquillart now or behind the
pit-bank without accusing her in abominable language of sleeping with
her mother's lodger; then, seized by savage desire, he would stifle her
with caresses.

Maheu asked him another question:

"Is it the Voreux's turn now?"

And when he turned his back after nodding affirmatively, both men
decided to enter the Yards.

The counting-house was a small rectangular room, divided in two by a
grating. On the forms along the wall five or six miners were waiting;
while the cashier assisted by a clerk was paying another who stood
before the wicket with his cap in his hand. Above the form on the
left, a yellow placard was stuck up, quite fresh against the smoky
grey of the plaster, and it was in front of this that the men had
been constantly passing all the morning. They entered two or three
at a time, stood in front of it, and then went away without a word,
shrugging their shoulders as if their backs were crushed.

Two colliers were just then standing in front of the announcement, a
young one with a square brutish head and a very thin old one, his face
dull with age. Neither of them could read; the young one spelt, moving
his lips, the old one contented himself with gazing stupidly. Many came
in thus to look, without understanding.

"Read us that there!" said Maheu, who was not very strong either in
reading, to his companion.

Then tienne began to read him the announcement. It was a notice from
the Company to the miners of all the pits, informing them that in
consequence of the lack of care bestowed on the timbering, and being
weary of inflicting useless fines, the Company had resolved to apply
a new method of payment for the extraction of coal. Henceforward they
would pay for the timbering separately, by the cubic metre of wood
taken down and used, based on the quantity necessary for good work.
The price of the tub of coal extracted would naturally be lowered, in
the proportion of fifty centimes to forty, according to the nature
and distance of the cuttings, and a somewhat obscure calculation
endeavoured to show that this diminution of ten centimes would be
exactly compensated by the price of the timbering. The Company added
also that, wishing to leave every one time to convince himself of the
advantages presented by this new scheme, they did not propose to apply
it till Monday, the 1st of December.

"Don't read so loud over there," shouted the cashier. "We can't hear
what we are saying."

tienne finished reading without paying attention to this observation.
His voice trembled, and when he had reached the end they all continued
to gaze steadily at the placard. The old miner and the young one looked
as though they expected something more; then they went away with
depressed shoulders.

"Good God!" muttered Maheu.

He and his companions sat down absorbed, with lowered heads, and while
files of men continued to pass before the yellow paper they made
calculations. Were they being made fun of? They could never make up
with the timbering for the ten centimes taken off the tram. At most
they could only get to eight centimes, so the Company would be robbing
them of two centimes, without counting the time taken by careful work.
This, then, was what this disguised lowering of wages really came to.
The Company was economizing out of the miners' pockets.

"Good Lord! Good Lord!" repeated Maheu, raising his head. "We should be
bloody fools if we took that."

But the wicket being free he went up to be paid. The heads only of the
workings presented themselves at the desk and then divided the money
between their men to save time.

"Maheu and associates," said the clerk, "Filonnire seam, cutting No.
7."

He searched through the lists which were prepared from the inspection
of the tickets on which the captains stated every day for each stall
the number of trams extracted. Then he repeated:

"Maheu and associates, Filonnire seam, cutting No. 7. One hundred and
thirty-five francs."

The cashier paid.

"Beg pardon, sir," stammered the pikeman in surprise. "Are you sure you
have not made a mistake?"

He looked at this small sum of money without picking it up, frozen by
a shudder which went to his heart. It was true he was expecting bad
payment, but it could not come to so little or he must have calculated
wrong. When he had given their shares to Zacharie, tienne, and the
other mate who replaced Chaval, there would remain at most fifty francs
for himself, his father, Catherine, and Jeanlin.

"No, no, I've made no mistake," replied the clerk. "There are two
Sundays and four rest days to be taken off; that makes nine days of
work." Maheu followed this calculation in a low voice: nine days gave
him about thirty francs, eighteen to Catherine, nine to Jeanlin. As
to Father Bonnemort, he only had three days. No matter, by adding the
ninety francs of Zacharie and the two mates, that would surely make
more.

"And don't forget the fines," added the clerk. "Twenty francs for fines
for defective timbering."

The pikeman made a gesture of despair. Twenty francs of fines, four
days of rest! That made out the account. To think that he had once
brought back a fortnight's pay of full a hundred and fifty francs when
Father Bonnemort was working and Zacharie had not yet set up house for
himself!

"Well, are you going to take it?" cried the cashier impatiently. "You
can see there's someone else waiting. If you don't want it, say so."

As Maheu decided to pick up the money with his large trembling hand the
clerk stopped him.

"Wait: I have your name here. Toussaint Maheu, is it not? The general
secretary wishes to speak to you. Go in, he is alone."

The dazed workman found himself in an office furnished with old
mahogany, upholstered with faded green rep. And he listened for five
minutes to the general secretary, a tall sallow gentleman, who spoke
to him over the papers of his bureau without rising. But the buzzing
in his ears prevented him from hearing. He understood vaguely that the
question of his father's retirement would be taken into consideration
with the pension of a hundred and fifty francs, fifty years of age
and forty years' service. Then it seemed to him that the secretary's
voice became harder. There was a reprimand; he was accused of occupying
himself with politics; an allusion was made to his lodger and the
Provident Fund; finally he was advised not to compromise himself with
these follies, he, who was one of the best workmen in the mine. He
wished to protest, but could only pronounce words at random, twisting
his cap between his feverish fingers, and he retired, stuttering:

"Certainly, sir--I can assure you, sir----"

Outside, when he had found tienne who waiting for him, he broke out:

"Well, I am a bloody fool, I ought to have replied! Not enough money to
get bread, and insults as well! Yes, he has been talking against you;
he told me the settlement was being poisoned. And what's to be done?
Good God! bend one's back and say thank you. He's right, that's the
wisest plan."

Maheu fell silent, overcome at once by rage and fear. tienne was
gloomily thinking. Once more they traversed the groups who blocked the
road. The exasperation was growing, the exasperation of a calm race,
the muttered warning of a storm, without violent gestures, terrible
to see above this solid mass. A few men understanding accounts had
made calculations, and the two centimes gained by the Company over the
wood were rumoured about, and excited the hardest heads. But it was
especially the rage over this disastrous pay, the rebellion of hunger
against the rest days and the fines. Already there was not enough to
eat, and what would happen if wages were still further lowered? In the
estaminets the anger grew loud, and fury so dried their throats that
the little money taken went over the counters.

From Montsou to the settlement tienne and Maheu never exchanged
a word. When the latter entered, Maheude, who was alone with the
children, noticed immediately that his hands were empty.

"Well, you're a nice one!" she said. "Where's my coffee and my sugar
and the meat? A bit of veal wouldn't have ruined you."

He made no reply, stifled by the emotion he had been keeping back.
Then the coarse face of this man hardened to work in the mines became
swollen with despair, and large tears broke from his eyes and fell in
a warm rain. He had thrown himself into a chair, weeping like a child,
and throwing fifty francs on the table:

"Here," he stammered. "That's what I've brought you back. That's our
work for all of us."

Maheude looked at tienne, and saw that he was silent and overwhelmed.
Then she also wept. How were nine people to live for a fortnight on
fifty francs? Her eldest son had left them, the old man could no longer
move his legs: it would soon mean death. Alzire threw herself round
her mother's neck, overcome on hearing her weep. Estelle was howling,
Lnore and Henri were sobbing.

And from the entire settlement there soon arose the same cry of
wretchedness. The men had come back, and each household was lamenting
the disaster of this bad pay. The doors opened, women appeared, crying
aloud outside, as if their complaints could not be held beneath the
ceilings of these small houses. A fine rain was falling, but they did
not feel it, they called one another from the pavements, they showed
one another in the hollow of their hands the money they had received.

"Look! they've given him this. Do they want to make fools of people?"

"As for me, see, I haven't got enough to pay for the fortnight's bread
with."

"And just count mine! I should have to sell my shifts!"

Maheude had come out like the others. A group had formed around the
Levaque woman, who was shouting loudest of all, for her drunkard of
a husband had not even turned up, and she knew that, large or small,
the pay would melt away at the Volcan. Philomne watched Maheu so that
Zacharie should not get hold of the money. Pierronne was the only one
who seemed fairly calm, for that sneak of a Pierron always arranged
things, no one knew how, so as to have more hours on the captain's
ticket than his mates. But Mother Brul thought this cowardly of her
son-in-law; she was among the enraged, lean and erect in the midst of
the group, with her fists stretched towards Montsou.

"To think," she cried, without naming the Hennebeaus, "that this
morning I saw their servant go by in a carriage! Yes, the cook in
a carriage with two horses, going to Marchiennes to get fish, sure
enough!"

A clamour arose, and the abuse began again. That servant in a white
apron taken to the market of the neighbouring town in her master's
carriage aroused indignation. While the workers were dying of hunger
they must have their fish, at all costs! Perhaps they would not always
be able to eat their fish: the turn of the poor people would come.
And the ideas sown by tienne sprang up and expanded in this cry of
revolt. It was impatience before the promised age of gold, a haste to
get a share of the happiness beyond this horizon of misery, closed in
like the grave. The injustice was becoming too great; at last they
would demand their rights, since the bread was being taken out of
their mouths. The women especially would have liked at once to take by
assault this ideal city of progress, in which there was to be no more
wretchedness. It was almost night, and the rain increased while they
were still filling the settlement with their tears in the midst of the
screaming helter-skelter of the children.

That evening at the Avantage the strike was decided on. Rasseneur no
longer struggled against it, and Souvarine accepted it as a first step.
tienne summed up the situation in a word: if the Company really wanted
a strike then the Company should have a strike.




CHAPTER V


A week passed, and work went on suspiciously and mournfully in
expectation of the conflict.

Among the Maheus the fortnight threatened to be more meagre than
ever. Maheude grew bitter, in spite of her moderation and good sense.
Her daughter Catherine, too, had taken it into her head to stay out
one night. On the following morning she came back so weary and ill
after this adventure that she was not able to go to the pit; and she
told with tears how it was not her fault, for Chaval had kept her,
threatening to beat her if she ran away. He was becoming mad with
jealousy, and wished to prevent her from returning to tienne's bed,
where he well knew, he said, that the family made her sleep. Maheude
was furious, and, after forbidding her daughter ever to see such a
brute again, talked of going to Montsou to box his ears. But, all the
same, it was a day lost, and the girl, now that she had this lover,
preferred not to change him.

Two days after there was another incident. On Monday and Tuesday
Jeanlin, who was supposed to be quietly engaged on his task at the
Voreux, had escaped, to run away into the marshes and the forest of
Vandame with Bbert and Lydie. He had seduced them; no one knew to what
plunder or to what games of precocious children they had all three
given themselves up. He received a vigorous punishment, a whipping
which his mother applied to him on the pavement outside before the
terrified children of the settlement. Who could have thought such a
thing of children belonging to her, who had cost so much since their
birth, and who ought now to be bringing something in? And in this cry
there was the remembrance of her own hard youth, of the hereditary
misery which made of each little one in the brood a bread-winner later
on.

That morning, when the men and the girl set out for the pit, Maheude
sat up in her bed to say to Jeanlin:

"You know that if you begin that game again, you little beast, I'll
take the skin off your bottom!"

In Maheu's new stall the work was hard. This part of the Filonnire
seam was so thin that the pikemen, squeezed between the wall and the
roof, grazed their elbows at their work. It was, too, becoming very
damp; from hour to hour they feared a rush of water, one of those
sudden torrents which burst through rocks and carry away men. The day
before, as tienne was violently driving in his pick and drawing it
out, he had received a jet of water in his face; but this was only an
alarm; the cutting simply became damper and more unwholesome. Besides,
he now thought nothing of possible accidents; he forgot himself there
with his mates, careless of peril. They lived in fire-damp without even
feeling its weight on their eyelids, the spider's-web veil which it
left on the eyelashes. Sometimes when the flame of the lamps grew paler
and bluer than usual it attracted attention, and a miner would put his
head against the seam to listen to the low noise of the gas, a noise
of air-bubbles escaping from each crack. But the constant threat was
of landslips; for, besides the insufficiency of the timbering, always
patched up too quickly, the soil, soaked with water, would not hold.

Three times during the day Maheu had been obliged to add to the
planking. It was half-past two, and the men would soon have to ascend.
Lying on his side, tienne was finishing the cutting of a block, when a
distant growl of thunder shook the whole mine.

"What's that, then?" he cried, putting down his axe to listen.

He had at first thought that the gallery was falling in behind his back.

But Maheu had already glided along the slope of the cutting, saying:

"It's a fall! Quick, quick!"

All tumbled down and hastened, carried away by an impulse of anxious
fraternity. Their lamps danced at their wrists in the deathly silence
which had fallen; they rushed in single file along the passages with
bent backs, as though they were galloping on all fours; and without
slowing this gallop they asked each other questions and threw brief
replies. Where was it, then? In the cuttings, perhaps. No, it came from
below; no, from the haulage. When they arrived at the chimney passage,
they threw themselves into it, tumbling one over the other without
troubling about bruises.

Jeanlin, with skin still red from the whipping of the day before, had
not run away from the pit on this day. He was trotting with naked
feet behind his tram, closing the ventilation doors one by one; when
he was not afraid of meeting a captain he jumped on to the last tram,
which he was not allowed to do for fear he should go to sleep. But
his great amusement was, whenever the tram was shunted to let another
one pass, to go and join Bbert, who was holding the reins in front.
He would come up slyly without his lamp and vigorously pinch his
companion, inventing mischievous monkey tricks, with his yellow hair,
his large ears, his lean muzzle, lit up by little green eyes shining
in the darkness. With morbid precocity, he seemed to have the obscure
intelligence and the quick skill of a human abortion which had returned
to its animal ways.

In the afternoon, Mouque brought Bataille, whose turn it was, to the
trammers; and as the horse was snuffing in the shunting, Jeanlin, who
had glided up to Bbert, asked him:

"What's the matter with the old hack to stop short like that? He'll
break my legs."

Bbert could not reply; he had to hold in Bataille, who was growing
lively at the approach of the other tram. The horse had smelled from
afar his comrade, Trompette, for whom he had felt great tenderness ever
since the day when he had seen him disembarked in the pit. One might
say that it was the affectionate pity of an old philosopher anxious
to console a young friend by imparting to him his own resignation and
patience; for Trompette did not become reconciled, drawing his trams
without any taste for the work, standing with lowered head blinded
by the darkness, and for ever regretting the sun. So every time that
Bataille met him he put out his head snorting, and moistened him with
an encouraging caress.

"By God!" swore Bbert, "there they are, licking each other's skins
again!"

Then, when Trompette had passed, he replied, on the subject of Bataille:

"Oh, he's a cunning old beast! When he stops like that it's because he
guesses there's something in the way, a stone or a hole, and he takes
care of himself; he doesn't want to break his bones. To-day I don't
know what was the matter with him down there after the door. He pushed
it, and stood stock-still. Did you see anything?"

"No," said Jeanlin. "There's water, I've got it up to my knees."

The tram set out again. And, on the following journey, when he had
opened the ventilation door with a blow from his head, Bataille again
refused to advance, neighing and trembling. At last he made up his
mind, and set off with a bound.

Jeanlin, who closed the door, had remained behind. He bent down and
looked at the mud through which he was paddling, then, raising his
lamp, he saw that the wood had given way beneath the continual bleeding
of a spring. Just then a pikeman, one Berloque, who was called Chicot,
had arrived from his cutting, in a hurry to go to his wife who had just
been confined. He also stopped and examined the planking. And suddenly,
as the boy was starting to rejoin his train, a tremendous cracking
sound was heard, and a landslip engulfed the man and the child.

There was deep silence. A thick dust raised by the wind of the fall
passed through the passages. Blinded and choked, the miners came from
every part, even from the farthest stalls, with their dancing lamps
which feebly lighted up this gallop of black men at the bottom of
these molehills. When the first men tumbled against the landslip,
they shouted out and called their mates. A second band, come from the
cutting below, found themselves on the other side of the mass of earth
which stopped up the gallery. It was at once seen that the roof had
fallen in for a dozen metres at most. The damage was not serious. But
all hearts were contracted when a death-rattle was heard from the ruins.

Bbert, leaving his tram, ran up, repeating:

"Jeanlin is underneath! Jeanlin is underneath!"

Maheu, at this very moment, had come out of the passage with Zacharie
and tienne. He was seized with the fury of despair, and could only
utter oaths:

"My God! my God! my God!"

Catherine, Lydie, and Mouquette, who had also rushed up, began to sob
and shriek with terror in the midst of the fearful disorder, which was
increased by the darkness. The men tried to make them be silent, but
they shrieked louder as each groan was heard.

The captain, Richomme, had come up running, in despair that neither
Ngrel, the engineer, nor Dansaert was at the pit. With his ear pressed
against the rocks he listened; and, at last, said those sounds could
not come from a child. A man must certainly be there. Maheu had already
called Jeanlin twenty times over. Not a breath was heard. The little
one must have been smashed up.

And still the groans continued monotonously. They spoke to the agonized
man, asking him his name. The groaning alone replied.

"Look sharp!" repeated Richomme, who had already organized a rescue,
"we can talk afterwards."

From each end the miners attacked the landslip with pick and shovel.
Chaval worked without a word beside Maheu and tienne, while Zacharie
superintended the removal of the earth. The hour for ascent had come,
and no one had touched food; but they could not go up for their soup
while their mates were in peril. They realized, however, that the
settlement would be disturbed if no one came back, and it was proposed
to send off the women. But neither Catherine nor Mouquette, nor even
Lydie, would move, nailed to the spot with a desire to know what
had happened, and to help. Levaque then accepted the commission of
announcing the landslip up above--a simple accident, which was being
repaired. It was nearly four o'clock; in less than an hour the men had
done a day's work; half the earth would have already been removed if
more rocks had not slid from the roof. Maheu persisted with such energy
that he refused, with a furious gesture, when another man approached to
relieve him for a moment.

"Gently!" said Richomme at last, "we are getting near. We must not
finish them off."

In fact the groaning was becoming more and more distinct. It was a
continuous rattling which guided the workers; and now it seemed to be
beneath their very picks. Suddenly it stopped.

In silence they all looked at one another, and shuddered as they felt
the coldness of death pass in the darkness. They dug on, soaked in
sweat, their muscles tense to breaking. They came upon a foot, and then
began to remove the earth with their hands, freeing the limbs one by
one. The head was not hurt. They turned their lamps on it, and Chicot's
name went round. He was quite warm, with his spinal column broken by a
rock.

"Wrap him up in a covering, and put him in a tram," ordered the
captain. "Now for the lad; look sharp."

Maheu gave a last blow, and an opening was made, communicating with
the men who were clearing away the soil from the other side. They
shouted out that they had just found Jeanlin, unconscious, with both
legs broken, still breathing. It was the father who took up the little
one in his arms, with clenched jaws constantly uttering "My God!" to
express his grief, while Catherine and the other women again began to
shriek.

A procession was quickly formed. Bbert had brought back Bataille,
who was harnessed to the trams. In the first lay Chicot's corpse,
supported by tienne; in the second, Maheu was seated with Jeanlin,
still unconscious, on his knees, covered by a strip of wool torn from
the ventilation door. They started at a walking pace. On each tram was
a lamp like a red star. Then behind followed the row of miners, some
fifty shadows in single file. Now that they were overcome by fatigue,
they trailed their feet, slipping in the mud, with the mournful
melancholy of a flock stricken by an epidemic. It took them nearly half
an hour to reach the pit-eye. This procession beneath the earth, in the
midst of deep darkness, seemed never to end through galleries which
bifurcated and turned and unrolled.

At the pit-eye Richomme, who had gone on before, had ordered an empty
cage to be reserved. Pierron immediately loaded the two trams. In the
first Maheu remained with his wounded little one on his knees, while in
the other tienne kept Chicot's corpse between his arms to hold it up.
When the men had piled themselves up in the other decks the cage rose.
It took two minutes. The rain from the tubbing fell very cold, and the
men looked up towards the air impatient to see daylight.

Fortunately a trammer sent to Dr. Vanderhaghen's had found him and
brought him back. Jeanlin and the dead man were placed in the captains'
room, where, from year's end to year's end, a large fire burnt. A
row of buckets with warm water was ready for washing feet; and, two
mattresses having been spread on the floor, the man and the child were
placed on them. Maheu and tienne alone entered. Outside, putters,
miners, and boys were running about, forming groups and talking in a
low voice.

As soon as the doctor had glanced at Chicot:

"Done for! You can wash him."

Two overseers undressed and then washed with a sponge this corpse
blackened with coal and still dirty with the sweat of work.

"Nothing wrong with the head," said the doctor again, kneeling on
Jeanlin's mattress. "Nor the chest either. Ah! it's the legs which have
given."

He himself undressed the child, unfastening the cap, taking off the
jacket, drawing off the breeches and shirt with the skill of a nurse.
And the poor little body appeared, as lean as an insect, stained with
black dust and yellow earth, marbled by bloody patches. Nothing could
be made out, and they had to wash him also. He seemed to grow leaner
beneath the sponge, the flesh so pallid and transparent that one could
see the bones. It was a pity to look on this last degeneration of a
wretched race, this mere nothing that was suffering and half crushed by
the falling of the rocks. When he was clean they perceived the bruises
on the thighs, two red patches on the white skin.

Jeanlin, awaking from his faint, moaned. Standing up at the foot of the
mattress with hands hanging down, Maheu was looking at him and large
tears rolled from his eyes.

"Eh, are you the father?" said the doctor, raising his eyes; "no need
to cry then, you can see he is not dead. Help me instead."

He found two simple fractures. But the right leg gave him some anxiety,
it would probably have to be cut off.

At this moment the engineer, Ngrel, and Dansaert, who had been
informed, came up with Richomme. The first listened to the captain's
narrative with an exasperated air. He broke out: Always this cursed
timbering! Had he not repeated a hundred times that they would leave
their men down there! and those brutes who talked about going out on
strike if they were forced to timber more solidly. The worst was that
now the Company would have to pay for the broken pots. M. Hennebeau
would be pleased!

"Who is it?" he asked of Dansaert, who was standing in silence before
the corpse which was being wrapped up in a sheet.

"Chicot! one of our good workers," replied the chief captain. "He has
three children. Poor chap!"

Dr. Vanderhaghen ordered Jeanlin's immediate removal to his parents'.
Six o'clock struck, twilight was already coming on, and they would do
well to remove the corpse also; the engineer gave orders to harness
the van and to bring a stretcher. The wounded child was placed on the
stretcher while the mattress and the dead body were put into the van.

Some putters were still standing at the door talking with some miners
who were waiting about to look on. When the door reopened there was
silence in the group. A new procession was then formed, the van in
front, then the stretcher, and then the train of people. They left the
mine square and went slowly up the road to the settlement. The first
November cold had denuded the immense plain; the night was now slowly
burying it like a shroud fallen from the livid sky.

tienne then in a low voice advised Maheu to send Catherine on to warn
Maheude so as to soften the blow. The overwhelmed father, who was
following the stretcher, agreed with a nod; and the young girl set out
running, for they were now near. But the van, that gloomy well-known
box, was already signalled. Women ran out wildly on to the paths; three
or four rushed about in anguish, without their bonnets. Soon there were
thirty of them, then fifty, all choking with the same terror. Then
someone was dead? Who was it? The story told by Levaque after first
reassuring them, now exaggerated their nightmare: it was not one man,
it was ten who had perished, and who were now being brought back in the
van one by one.

Catherine found her mother agitated by a presentiment; and after
hearing the first stammered words Maheude cried:

"The father's dead!"

The young girl protested in vain, speaking of Jeanlin. Without hearing
her, Maheude had rushed forward. And on seeing the van, which was
passing before the church, she grew faint and pale. The women at their
doors, mute with terror, were stretching out their necks, while others
followed, trembling as they wondered before whose house the procession
would stop.

The vehicle passed; and behind it Maheude saw Maheu, who was
accompanying the stretcher. Then, when they had placed the stretcher
at her door and when she saw Jeanlin alive with his legs broken, there
was so sudden a reaction in her that she choked with anger, stammering,
without tears:

"Is this it? They cripple our little ones now! Both legs! My God! What
do they want me to do with him?"

"Be still, then," said Dr. Vanderhaghen, who had followed to attend to
Jeanlin. "Would you rather he had remained below?"

But Maheude grew more furious, while Alzire, Lnore, and Henri were
crying around her. As she helped to carry up the wounded boy and to
give the doctor what he needed, she cursed fate, and asked where she
was to find money to feed invalids. The old man was not then enough,
now this rascal too had lost his legs! And she never ceased; while
other cries, more heart-breaking lamentations, were heard from a
neighbouring house: Chicot's wife and children were weeping over the
body. It was now quite night, the exhausted miners were at last eating
their soup, and the settlement had fallen into a melancholy silence,
only disturbed by these loud outcries.

Three weeks passed. It was found possible to avoid amputation; Jeanlin
kept both his legs, but he remained lame. On investigation the Company
had resigned itself to giving a donation of fifty francs. It had also
promised to find employment for the little cripple at the surface as
soon as he was well. All the same their misery was aggravated, for the
father had received such a shock that he was seriously ill with fever.

Since Thursday Maheu had been back at the pit and it was now Sunday.
In the evening tienne talked of the approaching date of the 1st
of December, preoccupied in wondering if the Company would execute
its threat. They sat up till ten o'clock waiting for Catherine, who
must have been delaying with Chaval. But she did not return. Maheude
furiously bolted the door without a word. tienne was long in going
to sleep, restless at the thought of that empty bed in which Alzire
occupied so little room.

Next morning she was still absent; and it was only in the afternoon, on
returning from the pit, that the Maheus learnt that Chaval was keeping
Catherine. He created such abominable scenes with her that she had
decided to stay with him. To avoid reproaches he had suddenly left the
Voreux and had been taken on at Jean-Bart, M. Deneulin's mine, and she
had followed him as a putter. The new household still lived at Montsou,
at Piquette's.

Maheu at first talked of going to fight the man and of bringing his
daughter back with a kick in the backside. Then he made a gesture of
resignation: what was the good? It always turned out like that; one
could not prevent a girl from sticking to a man when she wanted to. It
was much better to wait quietly for the marriage. But Maheude did not
take things so easily.

"Did I beat her when she took this Chaval?" she cried to tienne, who
listened in silence, very pale. "See now, tell me! you, who are a
sensible man. We have left her free, haven't we? because, my God! they
all come to it. Now, I was in the family way when the father married
me. But I didn't run away from my parents, and I should never have done
so dirty a trick as to carry the money I earned to a man who had no
want of it before the proper age. Ah! it's disgusting, you know. People
will leave off getting children!"

And as tienne still replied only by nodding his head, she insisted:

"A girl who went out every evening where she wanted to! What has she
got in her skin, then, not to be able to wait till I married her after
she had helped to get us out of difficulties? Eh? it's natural, one
has a daughter to work. But there! we have been too good, we ought not
to let her go and amuse herself with a man. Give them an inch and they
take an ell."

Alzire nodded approvingly. Lnore and Henri, overcome by this storm,
cried quietly, while the mother now enumerated their misfortunes: first
Zacharie who had had to get married; then old Bonnemort who was there
on his chair with his twisted feet; then Jeanlin who could not leave
the room for ten days with his badly-united bones; and now, as a last
blow, this jade Catherine, who had gone away with a man! The whole
family was breaking up. There was only the father left at the pit. How
were they to live, seven persons without counting Estelle, on his three
francs? They might as well jump into the canal in a band.

"It won't do any good to worry yourself," said Maheu in a low voice,
"perhaps we have not got to the end."

tienne, who was looking fixedly at the flags on the floor, raised his
head, and murmured with eyes lost in a vision of the future:

"Ah! it is time! it is time!"




PART FOUR




CHAPTER I


On that Monday the Hennebeaus had invited the Grgoires and their
daughter Ccile to lunch. They had formed their plans: on rising from
table, Paul Ngrel was to take the ladies to a mine, Saint-Thomas,
which had been luxuriously reinstalled. But this was only an amiable
pretext; this party was an invention of Madame Hennebeau's to hasten
the marriage of Ccile and Paul.

Suddenly, on this very Monday, at four o'clock in the morning, the
strike broke out. When, on the 1st of December, the Company had
adopted the new wage system, the miners remained calm. At the end of
the fortnight not one made the least protest on pay-day. Everybody,
from the manager down to the last overseer, considered the tariff
as accepted; and great was their surprise in the morning at this
declaration of war, made with a tactical unity which seemed to indicate
energetic leadership.

At five o'clock Dansaert woke M. Hennebeau to inform him that not
a single man had gone down at the Voreux. The settlement of the
Deux-Cent-Quarante, which he had passed through, was sleeping deeply,
with closed windows and doors. And as soon as the manager had jumped
out of bed, his eyes still swollen with sleep, he was overwhelmed.
Every quarter of an hour messengers came in, and dispatches fell on his
desk as thick as hail. At first he hoped that the revolt was limited
to the Voreux; but the news became more serious every minute. There
was the Mirou, the Crvecoeur, the Madeleine, where only the grooms
had appeared; the Victoire and Feutry-Cantel, the two best disciplined
pits, where the men had been reduced by a third; Saint-Thomas alone
numbered all its people, and seemed to be outside the movement. Up to
nine o'clock he dictated dispatches, telegraphing in all directions,
to the prefect of Lille, to the directors of the Company, warning the
authorities and asking for orders. He had sent Ngrel to go round the
neighbouring pits to obtain precise information.

Suddenly M. Hennebeau recollected the lunch; and he was about to send
the coachman to tell the Grgoires that the party had been put off,
when a certain hesitation and lack of will stopped him--the man who in
a few brief phrases had just made military preparations for a field of
battle. He went up to Madame Hennebeau, whose hair had just been done
by her lady's maid, in her dressing-room.

"Ah! they are on strike," she said quietly, when he had told her.
"Well, what has that to do with us? We are not going to leave off
eating, I suppose?"

And she was obstinate; it was vain to tell her that the lunch would be
disturbed, and that the visit to Saint-Thomas could not take place.
She found an answer to everything. Why lose a lunch that was already
cooking? And as to visiting the pit, they could give that up afterwards
if the walk was really imprudent.

"Besides," she added, when the maid had gone out, "you know that I am
anxious to receive these good people. This marriage ought to affect you
more than the follies of your men. I want to have it, don't contradict
me."

He looked at her, agitated by a slight trembling, and the hard firm
face of the man of discipline expressed the secret grief of a wounded
heart. She had remained with naked shoulders, already over-mature, but
still imposing and desirable, with the broad bust of a Ceres gilded by
the autumn. For a moment he felt a brutal desire to seize her, and to
roll his head between the breasts she was exposing in this warm room,
which exhibited the private luxury of a sensual woman and had about it
an irritating perfume of musk, but he recoiled; for ten years they had
occupied separate rooms.

"Good!" he said, leaving her. "Do not make any alterations."

M. Hennebeau had been born in the Ardennes. In his early life he had
undergone the hardships of a poor boy thrown as an orphan on the Paris
streets. After having painfully followed the courses of the cole
des Mines, at the age of twenty-four he had gone to the Grand' Combe
as engineer to the Sainte-Barbe mine. Three years later he became
divisional engineer in the Pas-de-Calais, at the Marles mines. It was
there that he married, wedding, by one of those strokes of fortune
which are the rule among the Corps des Mines, the daughter of the rich
owner of a spinning factory at Arras. For fifteen years they lived in
the same small provincial town, and no event broke the monotony of
existence, not even the birth of a child. An increasing irritation
detached Madame Hennebeau, who had been brought up to respect money,
and was disdainful of this husband who gained a small salary with such
difficulty, and who enabled her to gratify none of the satisfactions
of vanity which she had dreamed of at school. He was a man of strict
honesty, who never speculated, but stood at his post like a soldier.
The lack of harmony had only increased, aggravated by one of those
curious misunderstandings of the flesh which freeze the most ardent;
he adored his wife, she had the sensuality of a greedy blonde, and
already they slept apart, ill at ease and wounded. From that time she
had a lover of whom he was ignorant. At last he left the Pas-de-Calais
to occupy a situation in an office at Paris, with the idea that she
would be grateful to him. But Paris only completed their separation,
that Paris which she had desired since her first doll, and where she
washed away her provincialism in a week, becoming a woman of fashion
at once, and throwing herself into all the luxurious follies of the
period. The ten years which she spent there were filled by a great
passion, a public intrigue with a man whose desertion nearly killed
her. This time the husband had not been able to keep his ignorance, and
after some abominable scenes he resigned himself, disarmed by the quiet
unconsciousness of this woman who took her happiness where she found
it. It was after the rupture, and when he saw that she was ill with
grief, that he had accepted the management of the Montsou mines, still
hoping also that she would reform down there in that desolate black
country.

The Hennebeaus, since they had lived at Montsou, returned to the
irritated boredom of their early married days. At first she seemed
consoled by the great quiet, soothed by the flat monotony of the
immense plain; she buried herself in it as a woman who has done with
the world; she affected a dead heart, so detached from life that she
did not even mind growing stout. Then, beneath this indifference a
final fever declared itself, the need to live once more, and she
deluded herself for six months by organizing and furnishing to her
taste the little villa belonging to the management. She said it was
frightful, and filled it with upholstery, bric-a-brac, and all sorts of
artistic luxuries which were talked of as far as Lille. Now the country
exasperated her, those stupid fields spread out to infinity, those
eternal black roads without a tree, swarming with a horrid population
which disgusted and frightened her. Complaints of exile began; she
accused her husband of having sacrificed her to a salary of forty
thousand francs, a trifle which hardly sufficed to keep the house up.
Why could he not imitate others, demand a part for himself, obtain
shares, succeed in something at last? And she insisted with the cruelty
of an heiress who had brought her own fortune. He, always restrained,
and taking refuge in the deceptive coldness of a man of business, was
torn by desire for this creature, one of those late desires which are
so violent and which increase with age. He had never possessed her as a
lover; he was haunted by a continual image, to have her once to himself
as she had given herself to another. Every morning he dreamed of
winning her in the evening; then, when she looked at him with her cold
eyes, and when he felt that everything within her denied itself to him,
he even avoided touching her hand. It was a suffering without possible
cure, hidden beneath the stiffness of his attitude, the suffering of a
tender nature in secret anguish at the lack of domestic happiness. At
the end of six months, when the house, being definitely furnished, no
longer occupied Madame Hennebeau, she fell into the languor of boredom,
a victim who was being killed by exile, and who said that she was glad
to die of it.

Just then Paul Ngrel arrived at Montsou. His mother, the widow of
a Provence captain, living at Avignon on a slender income, had had
to content herself with bread and water to enable him to reach the
cole Polytechnique. He had come out low in rank, and his uncle, M.
Hennebeau, had enabled him to leave by offering to take him as engineer
at the Voreux. From that time he was treated as one of the family; he
even had his room there, his meals there, lived there, and was thus
enabled to send to his mother half his salary of three thousand francs.
To disguise this kindness M. Hennebeau spoke of the embarrassment to
a young man of setting up a household in one of those little villas
reserved for the mine engineers. Madame Hennebeau had at once taken the
part of a good aunt, treating her nephew with familiarity and watching
over his comfort. During the first months, especially, she exhibited
an overwhelming maternity with her advice regarding the smallest
subjects. But she remained a woman, however, and slid into personal
confidences. This lad, so young and so practical, with his unscrupulous
intelligence, professing a philosopher's theory of love, amused her
with the vivacity of the pessimism which had sharpened his thin face
and pointed nose. One evening he naturally found himself in her arms,
and she seemed to give herself up out of kindness, while saying to
him that she had no heart left, and wished only to be his friend. In
fact, she was not jealous; she joked him about the putters, whom he
declared to be abominable, and she almost sulked because he had no
young man's pranks to narrate to her. Then she was carried away by the
idea of getting him married; she dreamed of sacrificing herself and of
finding a rich girl for him. Their relations continued a plaything, a
recreation, in which she felt the last tenderness of a lazy woman who
had done with the world.

Two years had passed by. One night M. Hennebeau had a suspicion when
he heard naked feet passing his door. But this new adventure revolted
him, in his own house, between this mother and this son! And besides,
on the following day his wife spoke to him about the choice of Ccile
Grgoire which she had made for her nephew. She occupied herself over
this marriage with such ardour that he blushed at his own monstrous
imagination. He only felt gratitude towards the young man who, since
his arrival, had made the house less melancholy.

As he came down from the dressing-room, M. Hennebeau found that Paul,
who had just returned, was in the vestibule. He seemed to be quite
amused by the story of this strike.

"Well?" asked his uncle.

"Well, I've been round the settlements. They seem to be quite sensible
in there. I think they will first send you a deputation."

But at that moment Madame Hennebeau's voice called from the first story:

"Is that you, Paul? Come up, then, and tell me the news. How queer they
are to make such a fuss, these people who are so happy!"

And the manager had to renounce further information, since his wife had
taken his messenger. He returned and sat before his desk, on which a
new packet of dispatches was placed.

At eleven o'clock the Grgoires arrived, and were astonished when
Hippolyte, the footman, who was placed as sentinel, hustled them in
after an anxious glance at the two ends of the road. The drawing-room
curtains were drawn, and they were taken at once into the study, where
M. Hennebeau apologized for their reception; but the drawing-room
looked over the street and it was undesirable to seem to offer
provocations.

"What! you don't know?" he went on, seeing their surprise.

M. Grgoire, when he heard that the strike had at last broken out,
shrugged his shoulders in his placid way. Bah! it would be nothing,
the people were honest. With a movement of her chin, Madame Grgoire
approved his confidence in the everlasting resignation of the colliers;
while Ccile, who was very cheerful that day, feeling that she looked
well in her capuchin cloth costume, smiled at the word "strike," which
reminded her of visits to the settlements and the distribution of
charities.

Madame Hennebeau now appeared in black silk, followed by Ngrel.

"Ah! isn't it annoying!" she said, at the door. "As if they couldn't
wait, those men! You know that Paul refuses to take us to Saint-Thomas."

"We can stay here," said M. Grgoire, obligingly. "We shall be quite
pleased."

Paul had contented himself with formally saluting Ccile and her
mother. Angry at this lack of demonstrativeness, his aunt sent him with
a look to the young girl; and when she heard them laughing together she
enveloped them in a maternal glance.

M. Hennebeau, however, finished reading his dispatches and prepared a
few replies. They talked near him; his wife explained that she had not
done anything to this study, which, in fact, retained its faded old red
paper, its heavy mahogany furniture, its cardboard files, scratched
by use. Three-quarters of an hour passed and they were about to seat
themselves at table when the footman announced M. Deneulin. He entered
in an excited way and bowed to Madame Hennebeau.

"Ah! you here!" he said, seeing the Grgoires.

And he quickly spoke to the manager:

"It has come, then? I've just heard of it through my engineer. With me,
all the men went down this morning. But the thing may spread. I'm not
at all at ease. How is it with you?"

He had arrived on horseback, and his anxiety betrayed itself in his
loud speech and abrupt gestures, which made him resemble a retired
cavalry officer.

M. Hennebeau was beginning to inform him regarding the precise
situation, when Hippolyte opened the dining-room door. Then he
interrupted himself to say:

"Lunch with us. I will tell you more at dessert."

"Yes, as you please," replied Deneulin, so full of his thoughts that he
accepted without ceremony.

He was, however, conscious of his impoliteness and turned towards
Madame Hennebeau with apologies. She was very charming, however. When
she had had a seventh plate laid she placed her guests: Madame Grgoire
and Ccile by her husband, then M. Grgoire and Deneulin at her own
right and left; then Paul, whom she put between the young girl and her
father. As they attacked the _hors-d'oeuvre_ she said, with a
smile:

"You must excuse me; I wanted to give you oysters. On Monday, you know,
there was an arrival of Ostend oysters at Marchiennes, and I meant to
send the cook with the carriage. But she was afraid of being stoned--"

They all interrupted her with a great burst of gaiety. They thought the
story very funny.

"Hush!" said M. Hennebeau, vexed, looking at the window, through which
the road could be seen. "We need not tell the whole country that we
have company this morning."

"Well, here is a slice of sausage which they shan't have," M. Grgoire
declared.

The laughter began again, but with greater restraint. Each guest made
himself comfortable, in this room upholstered with Flemish tapestry
and furnished with old oak chests. The silver shone behind the panes
of the sideboards; and there was a large hanging lamp of red copper,
whose polished surfaces reflected a palm and an aspidistra growing
in majolica pots. Outside, the December day was frozen by a keen
north-east wind. But not a breath of it entered; a green-house warmth
developed the delicate odour of the pineapple, sliced in a crystal bowl.

"Suppose we were to draw the curtains," proposed Ngrel, who was amused
at the idea of frightening the Grgoires.

The housemaid, who was helping the footman, treated this as an order
and went and closed one of the curtains. This led to interminable
jokes: not a glass or a plate could be put down without precaution;
every dish was hailed as a waif escaped from the pillage in a conquered
town; and behind this forced gaiety there was a certain fear which
betrayed itself in involuntary glances towards the road, as though a
band of starvelings were watching the table from outside.

After the scrambled eggs with truffles, trout came on. The conversation
then turned to the industrial crisis, which had become aggravated
during the last eighteen months.

"It was inevitable," said Deneulin, "the excessive prosperity of recent
years was bound to bring us to it. Think of the enormous capital which
has been sunk, the railways, harbours, and canals, all the money buried
in the maddest speculations. Among us alone sugar works have been set
up as if the department could furnish three beetroot harvests. Good
heavens! and to-day money is scarce, and we have to wait to catch up
the interest of the expended millions; so there is a mortal congestion
and a final stagnation of business."

M. Hennebeau disputed this theory, but he agreed that the fortunate
years had spoilt the men.

"When I think," he exclaimed, "that these chaps in our pits used to
gain six francs a day, double what they gain now! And they lived well,
too, and acquired luxurious tastes. To-day, naturally, it seems hard to
them to go back to their old frugality."

"Monsieur Grgoire," interrupted Madame Hennebeau, "let me persuade
you, a little more trout. They are delicious, are they not?"

The manager went on:

"But, as a matter of fact, is it our fault? We, too, are cruelly
struck. Since the factories have closed, one by one, we have had a
deuce of a difficulty in getting rid of our stock; and in face of
the growing reduction in demand we have been forced to lower our net
prices. It is just this that the men won't understand."

There was silence. The footman presented roast partridge, while the
housemaid began to pour out Chambertin for the guests.

"There has been a famine in India," said Deneulin in a low voice, as
though he were speaking to himself. "America, by ceasing to order iron,
has struck a heavy blow at our furnaces. Everything holds together; a
distant shock is enough to disturb the world. And the empire, which was
so proud of this hot fever of industry!"

He attacked his partridge wing. Then, raising his voice:

"The worst is that to lower the net prices we ought logically to
produce more; otherwise the reduction bears on wages, and the worker is
right in saying that he has to pay the damage."

This confession, the outcome of his frankness, raised a discussion.
The ladies were not at all interested. Besides, all were occupied with
their plates, in the first zest of appetite. When the footman came
back, he seemed about to speak, then he hesitated.

"What is it?" asked M. Hennebeau. "If there are letters, give them to
me. I am expecting replies."

"No, sir. It is Monsieur Dansaert, who is in the hall. But he doesn't
wish to disturb you."

The manager excused himself, and had the head captain brought in. The
latter stood upright, a few paces from the table, while all turned
to look at him, huge, out of breath with the news he was bringing.
The settlements were quiet; only it had now been decided to send a
deputation. It would, perhaps, be there in a few minutes.

"Very well; thank you," said M. Hennebeau. "I want a report morning and
evening, you understand."

And as soon as Dansaert had gone, they began to joke again, and
hastened to attack the Russian salad, declaring that not a moment was
to be lost if they wished to finish it. The mirth was unbounded when
Ngrel, having asked the housemaid for bread, she replied, "Yes, sir,"
in a voice as low and terrified as if she had behind her a troop ready
for murder and rape.

"You may speak," said Madame Hennebeau complacently. "They are not here
yet."

The manager, who now received a packet of letters and dispatches,
wished to read one of his letters aloud. It was from Pierron, who,
in respectful phrases, gave notice that he was obliged to go out on
strike with his comrades, in order to avoid ill-treatment; and he added
that he had not even been able to avoid taking part in the deputation,
although he blamed that step.

"So much for liberty of work!" exclaimed M. Hennebeau.

Then they returned to the strike, and asked him his opinion.

"Oh!" he replied, "we have had them before. It will be a week, or, at
most, a fortnight, of idleness, as it was last time. They will go and
wallow in the public-houses, and then, when they are hungry, they will
go back to the pits."

Deneulin shook his head:

"I'm not so satisfied; this time they appear to be better organized.
Have they not a Provident Fund?"

"Yes, scarcely three thousand francs. What do you think they can do
with that? I suspect a man called tienne Lantier of being their
leader. He is a good workman; it would vex me to have to give him his
certificate back, as we did of old to the famous Rasseneur, who still
poisons the Voreux with his ideas and his beer. No matter, in a week
half the men will have gone down, and in a fortnight the ten thousand
will be below."

He was convinced. His only anxiety was concerning his own possible
disgrace should the directors put the responsibility of the strike on
him. For some time he had felt that he was diminishing in favour. So
leaving the spoonful of Russian salad which he had taken, he read over
again the dispatches received from Paris, endeavouring to penetrate
every word. His guests excused him; the meal was becoming a military
lunch, eaten on the field of battle before the first shots were fired.

The ladies then joined in the conversation. Madame Grgoire expressed
pity for the poor people who would suffer from hunger; and Ccile was
already making plans for distributing gifts of bread and meat. But
Madame Hennebeau was astonished at hearing of the wretchedness of
the Montsou colliers. Were they not very fortunate? People who were
lodged and warmed and cared for at the expense of the Company! In her
indifference for the herd, she only knew the lessons she had learnt,
and with which she had surprised the Parisians who came on a visit.
She believed them at last, and was indignant at the ingratitude of the
people.

Ngrel, meanwhile, continued to frighten M. Grgoire. Ccile did not
displease him, and he was quite willing to marry her to be agreeable to
his aunt, but he showed no amorous fever; like a youth of experience,
who, he said, was not easily carried away now. He professed to be
a Republican, which did not prevent him from treating his men with
extreme severity, or from making fun of them in the company of the
ladies.

"Nor have I my uncle's optimism, either," he continued. "I fear
there will be serious disturbances. So I should advise you, Monsieur
Grgoire, to lock up Piolaine. They may pillage you."

Just then, still retaining the smile which illuminated his good-natured
face, M. Grgoire was going beyond his wife in paternal sentiments with
regard to the miners.

"Pillage me!" he cried, stupefied. "And why pillage me?"

"Are you not a shareholder in Montsou! You do nothing; you live on the
work of others. In fact you are an infamous capitalist, and that is
enough. You may be sure that if the revolution triumphs, it will force
you to restore your fortune as stolen money."

At once he lost his child-like tranquillity, his serene
unconsciousness. He stammered:

"Stolen money, my fortune! Did not my great-grandfather gain, and
hardly, too, the sum originally invested? Have we not run all the risks
of the enterprise, and do I today make a bad use of my income?"

Madame Hennebeau, alarmed at seeing the mother and daughter also white
with fear, hastened to intervene, saying:

"Paul is joking, my dear sir."

But M. Grgoire was carried out of himself. As the servant was passing
round the crayfish he took three of them without knowing what he was
doing and began to break their claws with his teeth.

"Ah! I don't say but what there are shareholders who abuse their
position. For instance, I have been told that ministers have received
shares in Montsou for services rendered to the Company. It is like a
nobleman whom I will not name, a duke, the biggest of our shareholders,
whose life is a scandal of prodigality, millions thrown into the street
on women, feasting, and useless luxury. But we who live quietly, like
good citizens as we are, who do not speculate, who are content to live
wholesomely on what we have, giving a part to the poor: Come, now! your
men must be mere brigands if they came and stole a pin from us!"

Ngrel himself had to calm him, though amused at his anger. The
crayfish were still going round; the little crackling sound of their
carapaces could be heard, while the conversation turned to politics,
M. Grgoire, in spite of everything and though still trembling, called
himself a Liberal and regretted Louis Philippe. As for Deneulin, he was
for a strong Government; he declared that the Emperor was gliding down
the slope of dangerous concessions.

"Remember '89," he said. "It was the nobility who made the Revolution
possible, by their complicity and taste for philosophic novelties. Very
well! the middle class to-day are playing the same silly game with
their furious Liberalism, their rage for destruction, their flattery of
the people. Yes, yes, you are sharpening the teeth of the monster that
will devour us. It will devour us, rest assured!"

The ladies bade him be silent, and tried to change the conversation by
asking him news of his daughters. Lucie was at Marchiennes, where she
was singing with a friend; Jeanne was painting an old beggar's head.
But he said these things in a distracted way; he constantly looked at
the manager, who was absorbed in the reading of his dispatches and
forgetful of his guests. Behind those thin leaves he felt Paris and the
directors' orders, which would decide the strike. At last he could not
help yielding to his preoccupation.

"Well, what are you going to do?" he asked suddenly.

M. Hennebeau started; then turned off the question with a vague phrase.

"We shall see."

"No doubt you are solidly placed, you can wait," Deneulin began to
think aloud. "But as for me, I shall be done for if the strike reaches
Vandame. I shall have reinstalled Jean-Bart in vain; with a single pit,
I can only get along by constant production. Ah! I am not in a very
pleasant situation, I can assure you!"

This involuntary confession seemed to strike M. Hennebeau. He listened
and a plan formed within him: in case the strike turned out badly,
why not utilize it by letting things run down until his neighbour was
ruined, and then buy up his concession at a low price? That would be
the surest way of regaining the good graces of the directors, who for
years had dreamed of possessing Vandame.

"If Jean-Bart bothers you as much as that," said he, laughing, "why
don't you give it up to us?"

But Deneulin was already regretting his complaints. He exclaimed:

"Never, never!"

They were amused at his vigour and had already forgotten the strike
by the time the dessert appeared. An apple-charlotte meringue was
overwhelmed with praise. Afterwards the ladies discussed a recipe with
respect to the pineapple which was declared equally exquisite. The
grapes and pears completed their happy abandonment at the end of this
copious lunch. All talked excitedly at the same time, while the servant
poured out Rhine wine in place of champagne which was looked upon as
commonplace.

And the marriage of Paul and Ccile certainly made a forward step in
the sympathy produced by the dessert. His aunt had thrown such urgent
looks in his direction, that the young man showed himself very amiable,
and in his wheedling way reconquered the Grgoires, who had been cast
down by his stories of pillage. For a moment M. Hennebeau, seeing
the close understanding between his wife and his nephew, felt that
abominable suspicion again revive, as if in this exchange of looks he
had surprised a physical contact. But again the idea of the marriage,
made here before his face, reassured him.

Hippolyte was serving the coffee when the housemaid entered in a fright.

"Sir, sir, they are here!"

It was the delegates. Doors banged; a breath of terror was passing
through the neighbouring rooms.

Around the table the guests were looking at one another with uneasy
indecision. There was silence. Then they tried to resume their jokes:
they pretended to put the rest of the sugar in their pockets, and
talked of hiding the plate. But the manager remained grave; and the
laughter fell and their voices sank to a whisper, while the heavy feet
of the delegates who were being shown in tramped over the carpet of the
next room.

Madame Hennebeau said to her husband, lowering her voice:

"I hope you will drink your coffee."

"Certainly," he replied. "Let them wait."

He was nervous, listening to every sound, though apparently occupied
with his cup.

Paul and Ccile got up, and he made her venture an eye to the keyhole.
They were stifling their laughter and talking in a low voice.

"Do you see them?"

"Yes, I see a big man and two small ones behind."

"Haven't they ugly faces?"

"Not at all; they are very nice."

Suddenly M. Hennebeau left his chair, saying the coffee was too hot and
he would drink it afterwards. As he went out he put a finger to his
lips to recommend prudence. They all sat down again and remained at
table in silence, no longer daring to move, listening from afar with
intent ears jarred by these coarse male voices.




CHAPTER II


The previous day, at a meeting held at Rasseneur's, tienne and some
comrades had chosen the delegates who were to proceed on the following
day to the manager's house. When, in the evening, Maheude learnt that
her man was one of them, she was in despair, and asked him if he
wanted them to be thrown on the street. Maheu himself had agreed with
reluctance. Both of them, when the moment of action came, in spite of
the injustice of their wretchedness fell back on the resignation of
their race, trembling before the morrow, preferring still to bend their
backs to the yoke. In the management of affairs he usually gave way to
his wife, whose advice was sound. This time, however, he grew angry at
last, all the more so since he secretly shared her fears.

"Just leave me alone, will you?" he said, going to bed and turning his
back. "A fine thing to leave the mates now! I'm doing my duty."

She went to bed in her turn. Neither of them spoke. Then, after a long
silence, she replied:

"You're right; go. Only, poor old man, we are done for."

Midday struck while they were at lunch, for the rendezvous was at
one o'clock at the Avantage, from which they were to go together to
M. Hennebeau's. They were eating potatoes. As there was only a small
morsel of butter left, no one touched it. They would have bread and
butter in the evening.

"You know that we reckon on you to speak," said tienne suddenly to
Maheu.

The latter was so overcome that he was silent from emotion.

"No, no! that's too much," cried Maheude. "I'm quite willing he should
go there, but I don't allow him to go at the head. Why him, more than
any one else?"

Then tienne, with his fiery eloquence, began to explain. Maheu was
the best worker in the pit, the most liked, and the most respected;
whose good sense was always spoken of. In his mouth the miners' claims
would carry decisive weight. At first tienne had arranged to speak,
but he had been at Montsou for too short a time. One who belonged to
the country would be better listened to. In fact, the comrades were
confiding their interests to the most worthy; he could not refuse, it
would be cowardly.

Maheude made a gesture of despair.

"Go, go, my man; go and be killed for the others. I'm willing, after
all!"

"But I could never do it," stammered Maheu. "I should say something
stupid."

tienne, glad to have persuaded him, struck him on the shoulder.

"Say what you feel, and you won't go wrong."

Father Bonnemort, whose legs were now less swollen, was listening with
his mouth full, shaking his head. There was silence. When potatoes were
being eaten, the children were subdued and behaved well. Then, having
swallowed his mouthful, the old man muttered slowly:

"You can say what you like, and it will be all the same as if you said
nothing. Ah! I've seen these affairs, I've seen them! Forty years ago
they drove us out of the manager's house, and with sabres too! Now they
may receive you, perhaps, but they won't answer you any more than that
wall. Lord! they have money, why should they care?"

There was silence again; Maheu and tienne rose, and left the family
in gloom before the empty plates. On going out they called for Pierron
and Levaque, and then all four went to Rasseneur's, where the delegates
from the neighbouring settlements were arriving in little groups.
When the twenty members of the deputation had assembled there, they
settled on the terms to be opposed to the Company's, and then set out
for Montsou. The keen north-east wind was sweeping the street. As they
arrived, it struck two.

At first the servant told them to wait, and shut the door on them;
then, when he came back, he introduced them into the drawing-room, and
opened the curtains. A soft daylight entered, sifted through the lace.
And the miners, when left alone, in their embarrassment did not dare
to sit; all of them very clean, dressed in cloth, shaven that morning,
with their yellow hair and moustaches. They twisted their caps between
their fingers, and looked sideways at the furniture, which was in every
variety of style, as a result of the taste for the old-fashioned: Henry
II easy-chairs, Louis XV chairs, an Italian cabinet of the seventeenth
century, a Spanish contador of the fifteenth century, with an
altar-front serving as a chimney-piece, and ancient chasuble trimming
reapplied to the curtains. This old gold and these old silks, with
their tawny tones, all this luxurious church furniture, had overwhelmed
them with respectful discomfort. The eastern carpets with their long
wool seemed to bind their feet. But what especially suffocated them was
the heat, heat like that of a hot-air stove, which surprised them as
they felt it with cheeks frozen from the wind of the road. Five minutes
passed by and their awkwardness increased in the comfort of this rich
room, so pleasantly warm. At last M. Hennebeau entered, buttoned up in
a military manner and wearing on his frock-coat the correct little bow
of his decoration. He spoke first.

"Ah! here you are! You are in rebellion, it seems."

He interrupted himself to add with polite stiffness:

"Sit down, I desire nothing better than to talk things over."

The miners turned round looking for seats. A few of them ventured
to place themselves on chairs, while the others, disturbed by the
embroidered silks, preferred to remain standing.

There was a period of silence. M. Hennebeau, who had drawn his
easy-chair up to the fireplace, was rapidly looking them over and
endeavouring to recall their faces. He had recognized Pierron, who was
hidden in the last row, and his eyes rested on tienne who was seated
in front of him.

"Well," he asked, "what have you to say to me?"

He had expected to hear the young man speak and he was so surprised to
see Maheu come forward that he could not avoid adding:

"What! you, a good workman who have always been so sensible, one of the
old Montsou people whose family has worked in the mine since the first
stroke of the axe! Ah! it's a pity, I'm sorry that you are at the head
of the discontented."

Maheu listened with his eyes down. Then he began, at first in a low and
hesitating voice.

"It is just because I am a quiet man, sir, whom no one has anything
against, that my mates have chosen me. That ought to show you that it
isn't just a rebellion of blusterers, badly-disposed men who want to
create disorder. We only want justice, we are tired of starving, and it
seems to us that the time has come when things ought to be arranged so
that we can at least have bread every day."

His voice grew stronger. He lifted his eyes and went on, while looking
at the manager.

"You know quite well that we cannot agree to your new system. They
accuse us of bad timbering. It's true we don't give the necessary time
to the work. But if we gave it, our day's work would be still smaller,
and as it doesn't give us enough food at present, that would mean the
end of everything, the sweep of the clout that would wipe off all your
men. Pay us more and we will timber better, we will give the necessary
hours to the timbering instead of putting all our strength into the
picking, which is the only work that pays. There's no other arrangement
possible; if the work is to be done it must be paid for. And what have
you invented instead? A thing which we can't get into our heads, don't
you see? You lower the price of the tram and then you pretend to make
up for it by paying for all timbering separately. If that was true
we should be robbed all the same, for the timbering would still take
us more time. But what makes us mad is that it isn't even true; the
Company compensates for nothing at all, it simply puts two centimes a
tram into its pocket, that's all."

"Yes, yes, that's it," murmured the other deputies, noticing M.
Hennebeau make a violent movement as if to interrupt.

But Maheu cut the manager short. Now that he had set out his words
came by themselves. At times he listened to himself with surprise as
though a stranger were speaking within him. It was the things amassed
within his breast, things he did not even know were there, and which
came out in an expansion of his heart. He described the wretchedness
that was common to all of them, the hard toil, the brutal life, the
wife and little ones crying from hunger in the house. He quoted the
recent disastrous payments, the absurd fortnightly wages, eaten up by
fines and rest days and brought back to their families in tears. Was it
resolved to destroy them?

"Then, sir," he concluded, "we have come to tell you that if we've got
to starve we would rather starve doing nothing. It will be a little
less trouble. We have left the pits and we don't go down again unless
the Company agrees to our terms. The Company wants to lower the price
of the tram and to pay for the timbering separately. We ask for things
to be left as they were, and we also ask for five centimes more the
tram. Now it is for you to see if you are on the side of justice and
work."

Voices rose among the miners.

"That's it--he has said what we all feel--we only ask what's reason."

Others, without speaking, showed their approval by nodding their heads.
The luxurious room had disappeared, with its gold and its embroideries,
its mysterious piling up of ancient things; and they no longer even
felt the carpet which they crushed beneath their heavy boots.

"Let me reply, then," at last exclaimed M. Hennebeau, who was growing
angry. "First of all, it is not true that the Company gains two
centimes the tram. Let us look at the figures."

A confused discussion followed. The manager, trying to divide them,
appealed to Pierron, who hid himself, stammering. Levaque, on the
contrary, was at the head of the more aggressive, muddling up things
and affirming facts of which he was ignorant. The loud murmurs of their
voices were stifled beneath the hangings in the hot-house atmosphere.

"If you all talk at the same time," said M. Hennebeau, "we shall never
come to an understanding."

He had regained his calmness, the rough politeness, without bitterness,
of an agent who has received his instructions, and means that they
shall be respected. From the first word he never took his eye off
tienne, and manoeuvred to draw the young man out of his obstinate
silence. Leaving the discussion about the two centimes, he suddenly
enlarged the question.

"No, acknowledge the truth: you are yielding to abominable incitations.
It is a plague which is now blowing over the workers everywhere, and
corrupting the best. Oh! I have no need for any one to confess. I can
see well that you have been changed, you who used to be so quiet. Is
it not so? You have been promised more butter than bread, and you have
been told that now your turn has come to be masters. In fact, you have
been enrolled in that famous International, that army of brigands who
dream of destroying society."

Then tienne interrupted him.

"You are mistaken, sir. Not a single Montsou collier has yet enrolled.
But if they are driven to it, all the pits will enroll themselves. That
depends on the Company."

From that moment the struggle went on between M. Hennebeau and tienne
as though the other miners were no longer there.

"The Company is a Providence for the men, and you are wrong to threaten
it. This year it has spent three hundred thousand francs in building
settlements which only return two per cent, and I say nothing of the
pensions which it pays, nor of the coals and medicines which it gives.
You who seem to be intelligent, and who have become in a few months
one of our most skilful workmen, would it not be better if you were
to spread these truths, rather than ruin yourself by associating with
people of bad reputation? Yes, I mean Rasseneur, whom we had to turn
off in order to save our pits from socialistic corruption. You are
constantly seen with him, and it is certainly he who has induced you
to form this Provident Fund, which we would willingly tolerate if it
were merely a means of saving, but which we feel to be a weapon turned
against us, a reserve fund to pay the expenses of the war. And in this
connection I ought to add that the Company means to control that fund."

tienne allowed him to continue, fixing his eyes on him, while a slight
nervous quiver moved his lips. He smiled at the last remark, and simply
replied:

"Then that is a new demand, for until now, sir, you have neglected
to claim that control. Unfortunately, we wish the Company to occupy
itself less with us, and instead of playing the part of Providence
to be merely just with us, giving us our due, the profits which
it appropriates. Is it honest, whenever a crisis comes, to leave
the workers to die with hunger in order to save the shareholders'
dividends? Whatever you may say, sir, the new system is a disguised
reduction of wages, and that is what we are rebelling against, for if
the Company wants to economize it acts very badly by only economizing
on the men."

"Ah! there we are!" cried M. Hennebeau. "I was expecting that--the
accusation of starving the people and living by their sweat. How can
you talk such folly, you who ought to know the enormous risks which
capital runs in industry--in the mines, for example? A well-equipped
pit today costs from fifteen hundred thousand francs to two millions;
and it is difficult enough to get a moderate interest on the vast sum
that is thus swallowed. Nearly half the mining companies in France are
bankrupt. Besides, it is stupid to accuse those who succeed of cruelty.
When their workers suffer, they suffer themselves. Can you believe that
the Company has not as much to lose as you have in the present crisis?
It does not govern wages; it obeys competition under pain of ruin.
Blame the facts, not the Company. But you don't wish to hear, you don't
wish to understand."

"Yes," said the young man, "we understand very well that our lot will
never be bettered as long as things go on as they are going; and that
is the reason why some day or another the workers will end by arranging
that things shall go differently."

This sentence, so moderate in form, was pronounced in a low voice,
but with such conviction, tremulous in its menace, that a deep
silence followed. A certain constraint, a breath of fear passed
through the polite drawing-room. The other delegates, though scarcely
understanding, felt that their comrade had been demanding their share
of this comfort; and they began to cast sidelong looks over the warm
hangings, the comfortable seats, all this luxury of which the least
knick-knack would have bought them soup for a month.

At last M. Hennebeau, who had remained thoughtful, rose as a sign for
them to depart. All imitated him. tienne had lightly pushed Maheu's
elbow, and the latter, his tongue once more thick and awkward, again
spoke.

"Then, sir, that is all that you reply? We must tell the others that
you reject our terms."

"I, my good fellow!" exclaimed the manager, "I reject nothing. I am
paid just as you are. I have no more power in the matter than the
smallest of your trammers. I receive my orders, and my only duty is
to see that they are executed. I have told you what I thought I ought
to tell you, but it is not for me to decide. You have brought me your
demands. I will make them known to the directors, then I will tell you
their reply."

He spoke with the correct air of a high official avoiding any
passionate interest in the matter, with the courteous dryness of a
simple instrument of authority. And the miners now looked at him with
distrust, asking themselves what interest he might have in lying, and
what he would get by thus putting himself between them and the real
masters. A schemer, perhaps, this man who was paid like a worker, and
who lived so well!

tienne ventured to intervene again.

"You see, sir, how unfortunate it is that we cannot plead our cause in
person. We could explain many things, and bring forward many reasons of
which you could know nothing, if we only knew where we ought to go."

M. Hennebeau was not at all angry. He even smiled.

"Ah! it gets complicated as soon as you have no confidence in me; you
will have to go over there."

The delegates had followed the vague gesture of his hand toward one
of the windows. Where was it, over there? Paris, no doubt. But they
did not know exactly; it seemed to fall back into a terrible distance,
in an inaccessible religious country, where an unknown god sat on his
throne, crouching down at the far end of his tabernacle. They would
never see him; they only felt him as a force far off, which weighed on
the ten thousand colliers of Montsou. And when the director spoke he
had that hidden force behind him delivering oracles.

They were overwhelmed with discouragement; tienne himself signified
by a shrug of the shoulders that it would be best to go; while M.
Hennebeau touched Maheu's arm in a friendly way and asked after Jeanlin.

"That is a severe lesson now, and it is you who defend bad timbering.
You must reflect, my friends; you must realize that a strike would be
a disaster for everybody. Before a week you would die of hunger. What
would you do? I count on your good sense, anyhow; and I am convinced
that you will go down on Monday, at the latest."

They all left, going out of the drawing-room with the tramping of
a flock and rounded backs, without replying a word to this hope of
submission. The manager, who accompanied them, was obliged to continue
the conversation. The Company, on the one side, had its new tariff; the
workers, on the other, their demand for an increase of five centimes
the tram. In order that they might have no illusions, he felt he ought
to warn them that their terms would certainly be rejected by the
directors.

"Reflect before committing any follies," he repeated, disturbed at
their silence.

In the porch Pierron bowed very low, while Levaque pretended to adjust
his cap. Maheu was trying to find something to say before leaving, when
tienne again touched his elbow. And they all left in the midst of this
threatening silence. The door closed with a loud bang.

When M. Hennebeau re-entered the dining-room he found his guests
motionless and silent before the liqueurs. In two words he told his
story to Deneulin, whose face grew still more gloomy. Then, as he
drank his cold coffee, they tried to speak of other things. But the
Grgoires themselves returned to the subject of the strike, expressing
their astonishment that no laws existed to prevent workmen from leaving
their work. Paul reassured Ccile, stating that they were expecting the
police.

At last Madame Hennebeau called the servant:

"Hippolyte, before we go into the drawing-room just open the windows
and let in a little air."




CHAPTER III


A fortnight had passed, and on the Monday of the third week the lists
sent up to the managers showed a fresh decrease in the number of the
miners who had gone down. It was expected that on that morning work
would be resumed, but the obstinacy of the directors in not yielding
exasperated the miners. The Voreux, Crvecoeur, Mirou, and Madeleine
were not the only pits resting; at the Victoire and at Feutry-Cantel
only about a quarter of the men had gone down; even Saint-Thomas was
affected. The strike was gradually becoming general.

At the Voreux a heavy silence hung over the pit-mouth. It was a dead
workshop, these great empty abandoned Yards where work was sleeping.
In the grey December sky, along the high foot-bridges three or four
empty trams bore witness to the mute sadness of things. Underneath,
between the slender posts of the platforms, the stock of coal was
diminishing, leaving the earth bare and black; while the supplies of
wood were mouldering beneath the rain. At the quay on the canal a barge
was moored, half-laden, lying drowsily in the murky water; and on the
deserted pit-bank, in which the decomposed sulphates smoked in spite of
the rain, a melancholy cart showed its shafts erect. But the buildings
especially were growing torpid, the screening-shed with closed
shutters, the steeple in which the rumbling of the receiving-room no
more arose, and the machine-room grown cold, and the giant chimney too
large for the occasional smoke. The winding-engine was only heated
in the morning. The grooms sent down fodder for the horses, and the
captains worked alone at the bottom, having become labourers again,
watching over the damages that took place in the passages as soon as
they ceased to be repaired; then, after nine o'clock the rest of the
service was carried on by the ladders. And above these dead buildings,
buried in their garment of black dust, there was only heard the
escapement of the pumping-engine, breathing with its thick, long breath
all that was left of the life of the pit, which the water would destroy
if that breathing should cease.

On the plain opposite, the settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante seemed
also to be dead. The prefect of Lille had come in haste and the
police had tramped all the roads; but in face of the calmness of the
strikers, prefect and police had decided to go home again. Never had
the settlement given so splendid an example in the vast plain. The
men, to avoid going to the public-house, slept all day long; the women
while dividing the coffee became reasonable, less anxious to gossip and
quarrel; and even the troops of children seemed to understand it all,
and were so good that they ran about with naked feet, smacking each
other silently. The word of command had been repeated and circulated
from mouth to mouth; they wished to be sensible.

There was, however, a continuous coming and going of people in the
Maheus' house. tienne, as secretary, had divided the three thousand
francs of the Provident Fund among the needy families; afterwards
from various sides several hundred francs had arrived, yielded by
subscriptions and collections. But now all their resources were
exhausted; the miners had no more money to keep up the strike, and
hunger was there, threatening them. Maigrat, after having promised
credit for a fortnight, had suddenly altered his mind at the end of
a week and cut off provisions. He usually took his orders from the
Company; perhaps the latter wished to bring the matter to an end by
starving the settlements. He acted besides like a capricious tyrant,
giving or refusing bread according to the look of the girl who was
sent by her parents for provisions; and he especially closed his door
spitefully to Maheude, wishing to punish her because he had not been
able to get Catherine. To complete their misery it was freezing very
hard, and the women watched their piles of coal diminish, thinking
anxiously that they could no longer renew them at the pits now that the
men were not going down. It was not enough to die of hunger, they must
also die of cold.

Among the Maheus everything was already running short. The Levaques
could still eat on the strength of a twenty-franc piece lent by
Bouteloup. As to the Pierrons, they always had money; but in order
to appear as needy as the others, for fear of loans, they got their
supplies on credit from Maigrat, who would have thrown his shop at
Pierronne if she had held out her petticoat to him. Since Saturday many
families had gone to bed without supper, and in face of the terrible
days that were beginning not a complaint was heard, all obeyed the word
of command with quiet courage. There was an absolute confidence in
spite of everything, a religious faith, the blind gift of a population
of believers. Since an era of justice had been promised to them they
were willing to suffer for the conquest of universal happiness. Hunger
exalted their heads; never had the low horizon opened a larger beyond
to these people in the hallucination of their misery. They saw again
over there, when their eyes were dimmed by weakness, the ideal city
of their dream, but now growing near and seeming to be real, with its
population of brothers, its golden age of labour and meals in common.
Nothing overcame their conviction that they were at last entering it.
The fund was exhausted; the Company would not yield; every day must
aggravate the situation; and they preserved their hope and showed a
smiling contempt for facts. If the earth opened beneath them a miracle
would save them. This faith replaced bread and warmed their stomachs.
When the Maheus and the others had too quickly digested their soup,
made with clear water, they thus rose into a state of semi-vertigo,
that ecstasy of a better life which has flung martyrs to the wild
beasts.

tienne was henceforth the unquestioned leader. In the evening
conversations he gave forth oracles, in the degree to which study
had refined him and made him able to enter into difficult matters.
He spent the nights reading, and received a large number of letters;
he even subscribed to the _Vengeur_, a Belgian Socialist paper,
and this journal, the first to enter the settlement, gained for him
extraordinary consideration among his mates. His growing popularity
excited him more every day. To carry on an extensive correspondence, to
discuss the fate of the workers in the four corners of the province,
to give advice to the Voreux miners, especially to become a centre and
to feel the world rolling round him--continually swelled the vanity
of the former engine-man, the pikeman with greasy black hands. He
was climbing a ladder, he was entering this execrated middle class,
with a satisfaction to his intelligence and comfort which he did not
confess to himself. He had only one trouble, the consciousness of
his lack of education, which made him embarrassed and timid as soon
as he was in the presence of a gentleman in a frock-coat. If he went
on instructing himself, devouring everything, the lack of method
would render assimilation very slow, and would produce such confusion
that at last he would know much more than he could understand. So at
certain hours of good sense he experienced a restlessness with regard
to his mission--a fear that he was not the man for the task. Perhaps
it required a lawyer, a learned man, able to speak and act without
compromising the mates? But an outcry soon restored his assurance. No,
no; no lawyers! They are all rascals; they profit by their knowledge to
fatten on the people. Let things turn out how they will, the workers
must manage their own affairs. And his dream of popular leadership
again soothed him: Montsou at his feet, Paris in the misty distance,
who knows? The elections some day, the tribune in a gorgeous hall,
where he could thunder against the middle class in the first speech
pronounced by a workman in a parliament.

During the last few days tienne had been perplexed. Pluchart wrote
letter after letter, offering to come to Montsou to quicken the zeal
of the strikers. It was a question of organizing a private meeting
over which the mechanic would preside; and beneath this plan lay the
idea of exploiting the strike, to gain over to the International these
miners who so far had shown themselves suspicious. tienne feared a
disturbance, but he would, however, have allowed Pluchart to come if
Rasseneur had not violently blamed this proceeding. In spite of his
power, the young man had to reckon with the innkeeper, whose services
were of older date, and who had faithful followers among his clients.
So he still hesitated, not knowing what to reply.

On this very Monday, towards four o'clock, a new letter came from Lille
as tienne was alone with Maheude in the lower room. Maheu, weary of
idleness, had gone fishing; if he had the luck to catch a fine fish
under the sluice of the canal, they could sell it to buy bread. Old
Bonnemort and little Jeanlin had just gone off to try their legs,
which were now restored; while the children had departed with Alzire,
who spent hours on the pit-bank collecting cinders. Seated near the
miserable fire, which they no longer dared to keep up, Maheude, with
her dress unbuttoned and one breast hanging out of her dress and
falling to her belly, was suckling Estelle.

When the young man had folded the letter, she questioned him:

"Is the news good? Are they going to send us any money?"

He shook his head, and she went on:

"I don't know what we shall do this week. However, we'll hold on all
the same. When one has right on one's side, don't you think it gives
you heart, and one ends always by being the strongest?"

At the present time she was, to a reasonable extent, in favour of the
strike. It would have been better to force the Company to be just
without leaving off work. But since they had left it they ought not
to go back to it without obtaining justice. On this point she was
relentless. Better to die than to show oneself in the wrong when one
was right!

"Ah!" exclaimed tienne, "if a fine old cholera was to break out, that
would free us of all these Company exploiters."

"No, no," she replied, "we must not wish any one dead. That wouldn't
help us at all; plenty more would spring up. Now I only ask that they
should get sensible ideas, and I expect they will, for there are worthy
people everywhere. You know I'm not at all for your politics."

In fact she always blamed his violent language, and thought him
aggressive. It was good that they should want their work paid for at
what it was worth, but why occupy oneself with such things as the
bourgeois and Government? Why mix oneself up with other people's
affairs, when one would get nothing out of it but hard knocks? And she
kept her esteem for him because he did not get drunk, and regularly
paid his forty-five francs for board and lodging. When a man behaves
well one can forgive him the rest.

tienne then talked about the Republic, which would give bread to
everybody. But Maheude shook her head, for she remembered 1848, an
awful year, which had left them as bare as worms, her and her man, in
their early housekeeping years. She forgot herself in describing its
horrors, in a mournful voice, her eyes lost in space, her breast open;
while her infant, Estelle, without letting it go, had fallen asleep on
her knees. And tienne, also absorbed in thought, had his eyes fixed on
this enormous breast, of which the soft whiteness contrasted with the
muddy yellowish complexion of her face.

"Not a farthing," she murmured, "nothing to put between one's teeth,
and all the pits stopped. Just the same destruction of poor people as
to-day."

But at that moment the door opened, and they remained mute with
surprise before Catherine, who then came in. Since her flight with
Chaval she had not reappeared at the settlement. Her emotion was so
great that, trembling and silent, she forgot to shut the door. She
expected to find her mother alone, and the sight of the young man put
out of her head the phrases she had prepared on the way.

"What on earth have you come here for?" cried Maheude, without even
moving from her chair. "I don't want to have anything more to do with
you; get along."

Then Catherine tried to find words:

"Mother, it's some coffee and sugar; yes, for the children. I've been
thinking of them and done overtime."

She drew out of her pockets a pound of coffee and a pound of sugar,
and took courage to place them on the table. The strike at the Voreux
troubled her while she was working at Jean-Bart, and she had only been
able to think of this way of helping her parents a little, under the
pretext of caring for the little ones. But her good nature did not
disarm her mother, who replied:

"Instead of bringing us sweets, you would have done better to stay and
earn bread for us."

She overwhelmed her with abuse, relieving herself by throwing in her
daughter's face all that she had been saying against her for the past
month. To go off with a man, to hang on to him at sixteen, when the
family was in want! Only the most degraded of unnatural children could
do it. One could forgive a folly, but a mother never forgot a trick
like that. There might have been some excuse if they had been strict
with her. Not at all; she was as free as air, and they only asked her
to come in to sleep.

"Tell me, what have you got in your skin, at your age?"

Catherine, standing beside the table, listened with lowered head. A
quiver shook her thin under-developed girlish body, and she tried to
reply in broken words:

"Oh! if it was only me, and the amusement that I get! It's him. What
he wants I'm obliged to want too, aren't I? because, you see, he's the
strongest. How can one tell how things are going to turn out? Anyhow
it's done and can't be undone; it may as well be him as another now.
He'll have to marry me."

She defended herself without a struggle, with the passive resignation
of a girl who has submitted to the male at an early age. Was it not the
common lot? She had never dreamed of anything else; violence behind
the pit-bank, a child at sixteen, and then a wretched household if her
lover married her. And she did not blush with shame; she only quivered
like this at being treated like a slut before this lad, whose presence
oppressed her to despair.

tienne had risen, however, and was pretending to stir up the nearly
extinct fire in order not to interrupt the explanation. But their looks
met; he found her pale and exhausted; pretty, indeed, with her clear
eyes in the face which had grown tanned, and he experienced a singular
feeling; his spite had vanished; he simply desired that she should
be happy with this man whom she had preferred to him. He felt the
need to occupy himself with her still, a longing to go to Montsou and
force the other man to his duty. But she only saw pity in his constant
tenderness; he must feel contempt for her to gaze at her like that.
Then her heart contracted so that she choked, without being able to
stammer any more words of excuse.

"That's it, you'd best hold your tongue," began the implacable Maheude.
"If you come back to stay, come in; else get along with you at once,
and think yourself lucky that I'm not free just now, or I should have
put my foot into you somewhere before now."

As if this threat had suddenly been realized, Catherine received a
vigorous kick right behind, so violent that she was stupefied with
surprise and pain. It was Chaval who had leapt in through the open door
to give her this lunge of a vicious beast. For a moment he had watched
her from outside.

"Ah! slut," he yelled, "I've followed you. I knew well enough you were
coming back here to get him to fill you. And it's you that pay him, eh?
You pour coffee down him with my money!"

Maheude and tienne were stupefied, and did not stir. With a furious
movement Chaval chased Catherine towards the door.

"Out you go, by God!"

And as she took refuge in a corner he turned on her mother.

"A nice business, keeping watch while your whore of a daughter is
kicking her legs upstairs!"

At last he caught Catherine's wrist, shaking her and dragging her out.
At the door he again turned towards Maheude, who was nailed to her
chair. She had forgotten to fasten up her breast. Estelle had gone to
sleep, and her face had slipped down into the woollen petticoat; the
enormous breast was hanging free and naked like the udder of a great
cow.

"When the daughter is not at it, it's the mother who gets herself
plugged," cried Chaval. "Go on, show him your meat! He isn't
disgusted--your dirty lodger!"

At this tienne was about to strike his mate. The fear of arousing the
settlement by a fight had kept him back from snatching Catherine from
Chaval's hands. But rage was now carrying him away, and the two men
were face to face with inflamed eyes. It was an old hatred, a jealousy
long unacknowledged, which was breaking out. One of them now must do
for the other.

"Take care!" stammered tienne, with clenched teeth. "I'll do for you."

"Try!" replied Chaval.

They looked at one another for some seconds longer, so close that
their hot breaths burnt each other's faces. And it was Catherine who
suppliantly took her lover's hand again to lead him away. She dragged
him out of the settlement, fleeing without turning her head.

"What a brute!" muttered tienne, banging the door, and so shaken by
anger that he was obliged to sit down.

Maheude, in front of him, had not stirred. She made a vague gesture,
and there was silence, a silence which was painful and heavy with
unspoken things. In spite of an effort his gaze again returned to her
breast, that expanse of white flesh, the brilliance of which now made
him uncomfortable. No doubt she was forty, and had lost her shape, like
a good female who had produced too much; but many would still desire
her, strong and solid, with the large long face of a woman who had once
been beautiful. Slowly and quietly she was putting back her breast with
both hands. A rosy corner was still obstinate, and she pushed it back
with her finger, and then buttoned herself up, and was now quite black
and shapeless in her old gown.

"He's a filthy beast," she said at last. "Only a filthy beast could
have such nasty ideas. I don't care a hang what he says; it isn't worth
notice."

Then in a frank voice she added, fixing her eyes on the young man:

"I have my faults, sure enough, but not that one. Only two men have
touched me--a putter, long ago, when I was fifteen, and then Maheu. If
he had left me like the other, Lord! I don't quite know what would have
happened; and I don't pride myself either on my good conduct with him
since our marriage, because, when one hasn't gone wrong, it's often
because one hasn't the chance. Only I say things as they are, and I
know neighbours who couldn't say as much, don't you think?"

"That's true enough," replied tienne.

And he rose and went out, while she decided to light the fire again,
after having placed the sleeping Estelle on two chairs. If the father
caught and sold a fish they could manage to have some soup.

Outside, night was already coming on, a frosty night; and with lowered
head tienne walked along, sunk in dark melancholy. It was no longer
anger against the man, or pity for the poor ill-treated girl. The
brutal scene was effaced and lost, and he was thrown back on to the
sufferings of all, the abominations of wretchedness. He thought of the
settlement without bread, these women and little ones who would not
eat that evening, all this struggling race with empty bellies. And
the doubt which sometimes touched him awoke again in the frightful
melancholy of the twilight, and tortured him with a discomfort which he
had never felt so strongly before. With what a terrible responsibility
he had burdened himself! Must he still push them on in obstinate
resistance, now that there was neither money nor credit? And what
would be the end of it all if no help arrived, and starvation came to
beat down their courage? He had a sudden vision of disaster; of dying
children and sobbing mothers, while the men, lean and pale, went down
once more into the pits. He went on walking, his feet stumbling against
the stones, and the thought that the Company would be found strongest,
and that he would have brought misfortune on his comrades, filled him
with insupportable anguish.

When he raised his head he saw that he was in front of the Voreux. The
gloomy mass of buildings looked sombre beneath the growing darkness.
The deserted square, obstructed by great motionless shadows, seemed
like the corner of an abandoned fortress. As soon as the winding-engine
stopped, the soul left the place. At this hour of the night nothing was
alive, not a lantern, not a voice; and the sound of the pump itself
was only a distant moan, coming one could not say whence, in this
annihilation of the whole pit.

As tienne gazed the blood flowed back to his heart. If the workers
were suffering hunger, the Company was encroaching on its millions. Why
should it prove the stronger in this war of labour against gold? In any
case, the victory would cost it dear. They would have their corpses to
count. He felt the fury of battle again, the fierce desire to have done
with misery, even at the price of death. It would be as well for the
settlement to die at one stroke as to go on dying in detail of famine
and injustice. His ill-digested reading came back to him, examples of
nations who had burnt their towns to arrest the enemy, vague histories
of mothers who had saved their children from slavery by crushing their
heads against the pavement, of men who had died of want rather than
eat the bread of tyrants. His head became exalted, a red gaiety arose
out of his crisis of black sadness, chasing away doubt, and making
him ashamed of this passing cowardice of an hour. And in this revival
of his faith, gusts of pride reappeared and carried him still higher;
the joy of being leader, of seeing himself obeyed, even to sacrifice,
the enlarged dream of his power, the evening of triumph. Already he
imagined a scene of simple grandeur, his refusal of power, authority
placed in the hands of the people, when it would be master.

But he awoke and started at the voice of Maheu, who was narrating his
luck, a superb trout which he had fished up and sold for three francs.

They would have their soup. Then he left his mate to return alone to
the settlement, saying that he would follow him; and he entered and
sat down in the Avantage, awaiting the departure of a client to tell
Rasseneur decisively that he should write to Pluchart to come at once.
His resolution was taken; he would organize a private meeting, for
victory seemed to him certain if the Montsou colliers adhered in a mass
to the International.




CHAPTER IV


It was at the Bon-Joyeux, Widow Dsir's, that the private meeting was
organized for Thursday at two o'clock. The widow, incensed at the
miseries inflicted on her children the colliers, was in a constant
state of anger, especially as her inn was emptying. Never had there
been a less thirsty strike; the drunkards had shut themselves up at
home for fear of disobeying the sober word of command. Thus Montsou,
which swarmed with people on feast-days, now exhibited its wide street
in mute and melancholy desolation. No beer flowed from counters or
bellies, the gutters were dry. On the pavement at the Casimir Bar and
the Estaminet du Progrs one only saw the pale faces of the landladies,
looking inquiringly into the street; then in Montsou itself the
deserted doors extended from the Estaminet Lenfant to the Estaminet
Tison, passing by the Estaminet Piquette and the Tte-Coupe Bar; only
the Estaminet Saint-loi, which was frequented by captains, still drew
occasional glasses; the solitude even extended to the Volcan, where the
ladies were resting for lack of admirers, although they had lowered
their price from ten sous to five in view of the hard times. A deep
mourning was breaking the heart of the entire country.

"By God!" exclaimed Widow Dsir, slapping her thighs with both hands,
"it's the fault of the gendarmes! Let them run me in, devil take them,
if they like, but I must plague them."

For her, all authorities and masters were gendarmes; it was a term of
general contempt in which she enveloped all the enemies of the people.
She had greeted tienne's request with transport; her whole house
belonged to the miners, she would lend her ball-room gratuitously,
and would herself issue the invitations since the law required it.
Besides, if the law was not pleased, so much the better! She would give
them a bit of her mind. Since yesterday the young man had brought her
some fifty letters to sign; he had them copied by neighbours in the
settlement who knew how to write, and these letters were sent around
among the pits to delegates and to men of whom they were sure. The
avowed order of the day was a discussion regarding the continuation of
the strike; but in reality they were expecting Pluchart, and reckoning
on a discourse from him which would cause a general adhesion to the
International.

On Thursday morning tienne was disquieted by the non-appearance of his
old foreman, who had promised by letter to arrive on Wednesday evening.
What, then, was happening? He was annoyed that he would not be able to
come to an understanding with him before the meeting. At nine o'clock
he went to Montsou, with the idea that the mechanic had, perhaps, gone
there direct without stopping at the Voreux.

"No, I've not seen your friend," replied Widow Dsir. "But everything
is ready. Come and see."

She led him into the ball-room. The decorations were the same, the
garlands which supported at the ceiling a crown of painted paper
flowers, and the gilt cardboard shields in a line along the wall with
the names of saints, male and female. Only the musicians' platform had
been replaced by a table and three chairs in one corner; and the room
was furnished with forms ranged along the floor.

"It's perfect," tienne declared.

"And you know," said the widow, "that you're at home here. Yell as much
as you like. The gendarmes will have to pass over my body if they do
come!"

In spite of his anxiety, he could not help smiling when he looked at
her, so vast did she appear, with a pair of breasts so huge that one
alone would require a man to embrace it, which now led to the saying
that of her six weekday lovers she had to take two every evening on
account of the work.

But tienne was astonished to see Rasseneur and Souvarine enter; and as
the widow left them all three in the large empty hall he exclaimed:

"What! you here already!"

Souvarine, who had worked all night at the Voreux, the engine-men not
being on strike, had merely come out of curiosity. As to Rasseneur, he
had seemed constrained during the last two days, and his fat round face
had lost its good-natured laugh.

"Pluchart has not arrived, and I am very anxious," added tienne.

The innkeeper turned away his eyes, and replied between his teeth:

"I'm not surprised; I don't expect him."

"What!"

Then he made up his mind, and looking the other man in the face bravely:

"I, too, have sent him a letter, if you want me to tell you; and in
that letter I have begged him not to come. Yes, I think we ought to
manage our own affairs ourselves, without turning to strangers."

tienne, losing his self-possession and trembling with anger, turned
his eyes on his mate's and stammered:

"You've done that, you've done that?"

"I have done that, certainly! and you know that I trust Pluchart; he's
a knowing fellow and reliable, one can get on with him. But you see I
don't care a damn for your ideas, I don't! Politics, Government, and
all that, I don't care a damn for it! What I want is for the miner to
be better treated. I have worked down below for twenty years, I've
sweated down there with fatigue and misery, and I've sworn to make it
easier for the poor beggars who are there still; and I know well enough
you'll never get anything with all your ideas, you'll only make the
men's fate more miserable still. When they are forced by hunger to go
down again, they will be more crushed than ever; the Company will pay
them with strokes of the stick, like a runaway dog who is brought back
to his kennel. That's what I want to prevent, do you see!"

He raised his voice, protruding his belly and squarely planted on his
big legs. The man's whole patient, reasonable nature was revealed in
clear phrases, which flowed abundantly without an effort. Was it not
absurd to believe that with one stroke one could change the world,
putting the workers in the place of the masters and dividing gold as
one divides an apple? It would, perhaps, take thousands and thousands
of years for that to be realized. There, hold your tongue, with your
miracles! The most sensible plan was, if one did not wish to break
one's nose, to go straight forward, to demand possible reforms, in
short, to improve the lot of the workers on every occasion. He did
his best, so far as he occupied himself with it, to bring the Company
to better terms; if not, damn it all! they would only starve by being
obstinate.

tienne had let him speak, his own speech cut short by indignation.
Then he cried:

"Haven't you got any blood in your veins, by God?"

At one moment he would have struck him, and to resist the temptation
he rushed about the hall with long strides, venting his fury on the
benches through which he made a passage.

"Shut the door, at all events," Souvarine remarked. "There is no need
to be heard."

Having himself gone to shut it, he quietly sat down in one of the
office chairs. He had rolled a cigarette, and was looking at the other
two men with his mild subtle eye, his lips drawn by a slight smile.

"You won't get any farther by being angry," said Rasseneur judiciously.
"I believed at first that you had good sense. It was sensible to
recommend calmness to the mates, to force them to keep indoors, and to
use your power to maintain order. And now you want to get them into a
mess!"

At each turn in his walks among the benches, tienne returned towards
the innkeeper, seizing him by the shoulders, shaking him, and shouting
out his replies in his face.

"But, blast it all! I mean to be calm. Yes, I have imposed order on
them! Yes, I do advise them still not to stir! only it doesn't do to be
made a joke of after all! You are lucky to remain cool. Now there are
hours when I feel that I am losing my head."

This was a confession on his part. He railed at his illusions of a
novice, his religious dream of a city in which justice would soon
reign among the men who had become brothers. A fine method truly!
to cross one's arms and wait, if one wished to see men eating each
other to the end of the world like wolves. No! one must interfere, or
injustice would be eternal, and the rich would for ever suck the blood
of the poor. Therefore he could not forgive himself the stupidity
of having said formerly that politics ought to be banished from the
social question. He knew nothing then; now he had read and studied,
his ideas were ripe, and he boasted that he had a system. He explained
it badly, however, in confused phrases which contained a little of
all the theories he had successively passed through and abandoned.
At the summit Karl Marx's idea remained standing: capital was the
result of spoliation, it was the duty and the privilege of labour
to reconquer that stolen wealth. In practice he had at first, with
Proudhon, been captured by the chimera of a mutual credit, a vast bank
of exchange which suppressed middlemen; then Lassalle's cooperative
societies, endowed by the state, gradually transforming the earth into
a single industrial town, had aroused his enthusiasm until he grew
disgusted in face of the difficulty of controlling them; and he had
arrived recently at collectivism, demanding that all the instruments
of production should be restored to the community. But this remained
vague; he knew not how to realize this new dream, still hindered by
scruples of reason and good sense, not daring to risk the secretary's
absolute affirmations. He simply said that it was a question of getting
possession of the government first of all. Afterwards they would see.

"But what has taken you? Why are you going over to the bourgeois?" he
continued violently, again planting himself before the innkeeper. "You
said yourself it would have to burst up!"

Rasseneur blushed slightly.

"Yes, I said so. And if it does burst up, you will see that I am no
more of a coward than any one else. Only I refuse to be among those who
increase the mess in order to fish out a position for themselves."

tienne blushed in his turn. The two men no longer shouted, having
become bitter and spiteful, conquered by the coldness of their rivalry.
It was at bottom that which always strains systems, making one man
revolutionary in the extreme, pushing the other to an affectation of
prudence, carrying them, in spite of themselves, beyond their true
ideas into those fatal parts which men do not choose for themselves.
And Souvarine, who was listening, exhibited on his pale, girlish face
a silent contempt--the crushing contempt of the man who was willing
to yield his life in obscurity without even gaining the splendour of
martyrdom.

"Then it's to me that you're saying that?" asked tienne; "you're
jealous!"

"Jealous of what?" replied Rasseneur. "I don't pose as a big man; I'm
not trying to create a section at Montsou for the sake of being made
secretary."

The other man wanted to interrupt him, but he added:

"Why don't you be frank? You don't care a damn for the International;
you're only burning to be at our head, the gentleman who corresponds
with the famous Federal Council of the Nord!"

There was silence. tienne replied, quivering:

"Good! I don't think I have anything to reproach myself with. I always
asked your advice, for I knew that you had fought here long before me.
But since you can't endure any one by your side, I'll act alone in
future. And first I warn you that the meeting will take place even if
Pluchart does not come, and the mates will join in spite of you."

"Oh! join!" muttered the innkeeper; "that's not enough. You'll have to
get them to pay their subscriptions."

"Not at all. The International grants time to workers on strike. It
will at once come to our help, and we shall pay later on."

Rasseneur was carried beyond himself.

"Well, we shall see. I belong to this meeting of yours, and I shall
speak. I shall not let you turn our friends' heads, I shall let them
know where their real interests lie. We shall see whom they mean to
follow--me, whom they have known for thirty years, or you, who have
turned everything upside down among us in less than a year. No, no!
damn it all! We shall see which of us is going to crush the other."

And he went out, banging the door. The garlands of flowers swayed from
the ceiling, and the gilt shields jumped against the walls. Then the
great room fell back into its heavy calm.

Souvarine was smoking in his quiet way, seated before the table.
After having paced for a moment in silence, tienne began to relieve
his feelings at length. Was it his fault if they had left that fat
lazy fellow to come to him? And he defended himself from having ought
popularity. He knew not even how it had happened, this friendliness
of the settlement, the confidence of the miners, the power which he
now had over them. He was indignant at being accused of wishing to
bring everything to confusion out of ambition; he struck his chest,
protesting his brotherly feelings.

Suddenly he stopped before Souvarine and exclaimed:

"Do you know, if I thought I should cost a drop of blood to a friend, I
would go off at once to America!"

The engine-man shrugged his shoulders, and a smile again came on his
lips.

"Oh! blood!" he murmured. "What does that matter? The earth has need of
it."

tienne, growing calm, took a chair, and put his elbows on the other
side of the table. This fair face, with the dreamy eyes, which
sometimes grew savage with a red light, disturbed him, and exercised
a singular power over his will. In spite of his comrade's silence,
conquered even by that silence, he felt himself gradually absorbed.

"Well," he asked, "what would you do in my place? Am I not right to act
as I do? Isn't it best for us to join this association?"

Souvarine, after having slowly ejected a jet of smoke, replied by his
favourite word:

"Oh, foolery! but meanwhile it's always so. Besides, their
International will soon begin to move. He has taken it up."

"Who, then?"

"He!"

He had pronounced this word in a whisper, with religious fervour,
casting a glance towards the east. He was speaking of the master,
Bakunin the destroyer.

"He alone can give the thunderclap," he went on, "while your learned
men, with their evolution, are mere cowards. Before three years are
past, the International, under his orders, will crush the old world."

tienne pricked up his ears in attention. He was burning to gain
knowledge, to understand this worship of destruction, regarding which
the engine-man only uttered occasional obscure words, as though he kept
certain mysteries to himself.

"Well, but explain to me. What is your aim?"

"To destroy everything. No more nations, no more governments, no more
property, no more God nor worship."

"I quite understand. Only what will that lead you to?"

"To the primitive formless commune, to a new world, to the renewal of
everything."

"And the means of execution? How do you reckon to set about it?"

"By fire, by poison, by the dagger. The brigand is the true hero, the
popular avenger, the revolutionary in action, with no phrases drawn
out of books. We need a series of tremendous outrages to frighten the
powerful and to arouse the people."

As he talked, Souvarine grew terrible. An ecstasy raised him on his
chair, a mystic flame darted from his pale eyes, and his delicate hands
gripped the edge of the table almost to breaking. The other man looked
at him in fear, and thought of the stories of which he had received
vague intimation, of mines charged beneath the tsar's palace, of chiefs
of police struck down by knives like wild boars, of his mistress, the
only woman he had loved, hanged at Moscow one rainy morning, while in
the crowd he kissed her with his eyes for the last time.

"No! no!" murmured tienne, as with a gesture he pushed away these
abominable visions, "we haven't got to that yet over here. Murder and
fire, never! It is monstrous, unjust, all the mates would rise and
strangle the guilty one!"

And besides, he could not understand; the instincts of his race refused
to accept this sombre dream of the extermination of the world, mown
level like a rye-field. Then what would they do afterwards? How would
the nations spring up again? He demanded a reply.

"Tell me your programme. We like to know where we are going to."

Then Souvarine concluded peacefully, with his gaze fixed on space:

"All reasoning about the future is criminal, because it prevents pure
destruction, and interferes with the progress of revolution."

This made tienne laugh, in spite of the cold shiver which passed over
his flesh. Besides, he willingly acknowledged that there was something
in these ideas, which attracted him by their fearful simplicity. Only
it would be playing into Rasseneur's hands if he were to repeat such
things to his comrades. It was necessary to be practical.

Widow Dsir proposed that they should have lunch. They agreed, and
went into the inn parlour, which was separated from the ball-room on
weekdays by a movable partition. When they had finished their omelette
and cheese, the engine-man proposed to depart, and as the other tried
to detain him:

"What for? To listen to you talking useless foolery? I've seen enough
of it. Good day."

He went off in his gentle, obstinate way, with a cigarette between his
lips.

tienne's anxiety increased. It was one o'clock, and Pluchart was
decidedly breaking his promise. Towards half-past one the delegates
began to appear, and he had to receive them, for he wished to see
who entered, for fear that the Company might send its usual spies.
He examined every letter of invitation, and took note of those who
entered; many came in without a letter, as they were admitted provided
he knew them. As two o'clock struck Rasseneur entered, finishing
his pipe at the counter, and chatting without haste. This provoking
calmness still further disturbed tienne, all the more as many had come
merely for fun--Zacharie, Mouquet, and others. These cared little about
the strike, and found it a great joke to do nothing. Seated at tables,
and spending their last two sous on drink, they grinned and bantered
their mates, the serious ones, who had come to make fools of themselves.

Another quarter of an hour passed; there was impatience in the hall.
Then tienne, in despair, made a gesture of resolution. And he decided
to enter, when Widow Dsir, who was putting her head outside, exclaimed:

"But here he is, your gentleman!"

It was, in fact, Pluchart. He came in a cab drawn by a broken-winded
horse. He jumped at once on to the pavement, a thin, insipidly handsome
man, with a large square head;--in his black cloth frock-coat he had
the Sunday air of a well-to-do workman. For five years he had not done
a stroke with the file, and he took care of his appearance, especially
combing his hair in a correct manner, vain of his successes on the
platform; but his limbs were still stiff, and the nails of his large
hands, eaten by the iron, had not grown again. Very active, he worked
out his ambitions, scouring the province unceasingly in order to place
his ideas.

"Ah! don't be angry with me," he said, anticipating questions and
reproaches. "Yesterday, lecture at Preuilly in the morning, meeting in
the evening at Valencay. Today, lunch at Marchiennes with Sauvagnat.
Then I had to take a cab. I'm worn out; you can tell by my voice. But
that's nothing; I shall speak all the same."

He was on the threshold of the Bon-Joyeux, when he bethought himself.

"By jingo! I'm forgetting the tickets. We should have been in a fine
fix!"

He went back to the cab, which the cabman drew up again, and he pulled
out a little black wooden box, which he carried off under his arm.

tienne walked radiantly in his shadow, while Rasseneur, in
consternation, did not dare to offer his hand. But the other was
already pressing it, and saying a rapid word or two about the letter.
What a rum idea! Why not hold this meeting? One should always hold a
meeting when possible. Widow Dsir asked if he would take anything,
but he refused. No need; he spoke without drinking. Only he was in
a hurry, because in the evening he reckoned on pushing as far as
Joiselle, where he wished to come to an understanding with Legoujeux.
Then they all entered the ball-room together. Maheu and Levaque, who
had arrived late, followed them. The door was then locked, in order to
be in privacy. This made the jokers laugh even more, Zacharie shouting
to Mouquet that perhaps they were going to get them all with child in
there.

About a hundred miners were waiting on the benches in the close air of
the room, with the warm odours of the last ball rising from the floor.
Whispers ran round and all heads turned, while the new-comers sat down
in the empty places. They gazed at the Lille gentleman, and the black
frock-coat caused a certain surprise and discomfort.

But on tienne's proposition the meeting was at once constituted. He
gave out the names, while the others approved by lifting their hands.
Pluchart was nominated chairman, and Maheu and tienne himself were
voted stewards. There was a movement of chairs and the officers were
installed; for a moment they watched the chairman disappear beneath the
table under which he slid the box, which he had not let go. When he
reappeared he struck lightly with his fist to call for attention; then
he began in a hoarse voice:

"Citizens!"

A little door opened and he had to stop. It was Widow Dsir who, coming
round by the kitchen, brought in six glasses on a tray.

"Don't put yourselves out," she said. "When one talks one gets thirsty."

Maheu relieved her of the tray and Pluchart was able to go on. He said
how very touched he was at his reception by the Montsou workers, he
excused himself for his delay, mentioning his fatigue and his sore
throat, then he gave place to Citizen Rasseneur, who wished to speak.

Rasseneur had already planted himself beside the table near the
glasses. The back of a chair served him as a rostrum. He seemed very
moved, and coughed before starting in a loud voice:

"Mates!"

What gave him his influence over the workers at the pit was the
facility of his speech, the good-natured way in which he could go
on talking to them by the hour without ever growing weary. He never
ventured to gesticulate, but stood stolid and smiling, drowning them
and dazing them, until they all shouted: "Yes, yes, that's true enough,
you're right!" However, on this day, from the first word, he felt that
there was a sullen opposition. This made him advance prudently. He
only discussed the continuation of the strike, and waited for applause
before attacking the International. Certainly honour prevented them
from yielding to the Company's demands; but how much misery! what
a terrible future if it was necessary to persist much longer! and
without declaring for submission he damped their courage, he showed
them the settlements dying of hunger, he asked on what resources the
partisans of resistance were counting. Three or four friends tried to
applaud him, but this accentuated the cold silence of the majority,
and the gradually rising disapprobation which greeted his phrases.
Then, despairing of winning them over, he was carried away by anger,
he foretold misfortune if they allowed their heads to be turned at
the instigation of strangers. Two-thirds of the audience had risen
indignantly, trying to silence him, since he insulted them by treating
them like children unable to act for themselves. But he went on
speaking in spite of the tumult, taking repeated gulps of beer, and
shouting violently that the man was not born who would prevent him from
doing his duty.

Pluchart had risen. As he had no bell he struck his fist on the table,
repeating in his hoarse voice:

"Citizens, citizens!"

At last he obtained a little quiet and the meeting, when consulted,
brought Rasseneur's speech to an end. The delegates who had represented
the pits in the interview with the manager led the others, all enraged
by starvation and agitated by new ideas. The voting was decided in
advance.

"You don't care a damn, you don't! you can eat!" yelled Levaque,
thrusting out his fist at Rasseneur.

tienne leaned over behind the chairman's back to appease Maheu, who
was very red, and carried out of himself by this hypocritical discourse.

"Citizens!" said Pluchart, "allow me to speak!"

There was deep silence. He spoke. His voice sounded painful and hoarse;
but he was used to it on his journeys, and took his laryngitis about
with him like his programme. Gradually his voice expanded and he
produced pathetic effects with it. With open arms and accompanying his
periods with a swaying of his shoulders, he had an eloquence which
recalled the pulpit, a religious fashion of sinking the ends of his
sentences whose monotonous roll at last carried conviction.

His discourse centred on the greatness and the advantages of the
International; it was that with which he always started in every new
locality. He explained its aim, the emancipation of the workers; he
showed its imposing structure--below the commune, higher the province,
still higher the nation, and at the summit humanity. His arms moved
slowly, piling up the stages, preparing the immense cathedral of the
future world. Then there was the internal administration: he read the
statutes, spoke of the congresses, pointed out the growing importance
of the work, the enlargement of the programme, which, starting from the
discussion of wages, was now working towards a social liquidation, to
have done with the wage system. No more nationalities. The workers of
the whole world would be united by a common need for justice, sweeping
away the middle-class corruption, founding, at last, a free society,
in which he who did not work should not reap! He roared; his breath
startled the flowers of painted paper beneath the low smoky ceiling
which sent back the sound of his voice.

A wave passed through the audience. Some of them cried:

"That's it! We're with you."

He went on. The world would be conquered before three years. And he
enumerated the nations already conquered. From all sides adhesions were
raining in. Never had a young religion counted so many disciples. Then,
when they had the upper hand they would dictate terms to the masters,
who, in their turn, would have a fist at their throats.

"Yes, yes! they'll have to go down!"

With a gesture he enforced silence. Now he was entering on the strike
question. In principle he disapproved of strikes; it was a slow method,
which aggravated the sufferings of the worker. But before better things
arrived, and when they were inevitable, one must make up one's mind
to them, for they had the advantage of disorganizing capital. And in
this case he showed the International as providence for strikers, and
quoted examples: in Paris, during the strike of the bronze-workers, the
masters had granted everything at once, terrified at the news that the
International was sending help; in London it had saved the miners at a
colliery, by sending back, at its own expense, a ship-load of Belgians
who had been brought over by the coal-owner. It was sufficient to join
and the companies trembled, for the men entered the great army of
workers who were resolved to die for one another rather than to remain
the slaves of a capitalistic society.

Applause interrupted him. He wiped his forehead with his handkerchief,
at the same time refusing a glass which Maheu passed to him. When he
was about to continue fresh applause cut short his speech.

"It's all right," he said rapidly to tienne. "They've had enough.
Quick! the cards!"

He had plunged beneath the table, and reappeared with the little black
wooden box.

"Citizens!" he shouted, dominating the disturbance, "here are the cards
of membership. Let your delegates come up, and I will give them to them
to be distributed. Later on we can arrange everything."

Rasseneur rushed forward and again protested. tienne was also
agitated; having to make a speech. Extreme confusion followed. Levaque
jumped up with his fists out, as if to fight. Maheu was up and
speaking, but nobody could distinguish a single word. In the growing
tumult the dust rose from the floor, a floating dust of former balls,
poisoning the air with a strong odour of putters and trammers.

Suddenly the little door opened, and Widow Dsir filled it with her
belly and breast, shouting in a thundering voice:

"For God's sake, silence! The gendarmes!"

It was the commissioner of the district, who had arrived rather late
to prepare a report and to break up the meeting. Four gendarmes
accompanied him. For five minutes the widow had delayed them at the
door, replying that she was at home, and that she had a perfect right
to entertain her friends. But they had hustled her away, and she had
rushed in to warn her children.

"Must clear out through here," she said again. "There's a dirty
gendarme guarding the court. It doesn't matter; my little wood-house
opens into the alley. Quick, then!" The commissioner was already
knocking with his fist, and as the door was not opened, he threatened
to force it. A spy must have talked, for he cried that the meeting was
illegal, a large number of miners being there without any letter of
invitation.

In the hall the trouble was growing. They could not escape thus; they
had not even voted either for adhesion or for the continuation of the
strike. All persisted in talking at the same time. At last the chairman
suggested a vote by acclamation. Arms were raised, and the delegates
declared hastily that they would join in the name of their absent
mates. And it was thus that the ten thousand colliers of Montsou became
members of the International. Meanwhile, the retreat began. In order to
cover it, Widow Dsir had propped herself up against the door, which
the butt-ends of the gendarmes' muskets were forcing at her back. The
miners jumped over the benches, and escaped, one by one, through the
kitchen and the wood-yard. Rasseneur disappeared among the first, and
Levaque followed him, forgetful of his abuse, and planning how he could
get an offer of a glass to pull himself together. tienne, after having
seized the little box, waited with Pluchart and Maheu, who considered
it a point of honour to emerge last. As they disappeared the lock gave,
and the commissioner found himself in the presence of the widow, whose
breast and belly still formed a barricade.

"It doesn't help you much to smash everything in my house," she said.
"You can see there's nobody here."

The commissioner, a slow man who did not care for scenes, simply
threatened to take her off to prison. And he then went away with his
four gendarmes to prepare a report, beneath the jeers of Zacharie and
Mouquet, who were full of admiration for the way in which their mates
had humbugged this armed force, for which they themselves did not care
a hang.

In the alley outside, tienne, embarrassed by the box, was rushing
along, followed by the others. He suddenly thought of Pierron, and
asked why he had not turned up. Maheu, also running, replied that he
was ill--a convenient illness, the fear of compromising himself. They
wished to retain Pluchart, but, without stopping, he declared that
he must set out at once for Joiselle, where Legoujeux was awaiting
orders. Then, as they ran, they shouted out to him their wishes for a
pleasant journey, and rushed through Montsou with their heels in the
air. A few words were exchanged, broken by the panting of their chests.
tienne and Maheu were laughing confidently, henceforth certain of
victory. When the International had sent help, it would be the Company
that would beg them to resume work. And in this burst of hope, in
this gallop of big boots sounding over the pavement of the streets,
there was something else also, something sombre and fierce, a gust of
violence which would inflame the settlements in the four corners of the
country.




CHAPTER V


Another fortnight had passed by. It was the beginning of January and
cold mists benumbed the immense plain. The misery had grown still
greater, and the settlements were in agony from hour to hour beneath
the increasing famine. Four thousand francs sent by the International
from London had scarcely supplied bread for three days, and then
nothing had come. This great dead hope was beating down their courage.
On what were they to count now since even their brothers had abandoned
them? They felt themselves separated from the world and lost in the
midst of this deep winter.

On Tuesday no resources were left in the Deux-Cent-Quarante
settlement. tienne and the delegates had multiplied their energies.
New subscriptions were opened in the neighbouring towns, and even in
Paris; collections were made and lectures organized. These efforts
came to nothing. Public opinion, which had at first been moved, grew
indifferent now that the strike dragged on for ever, and so quietly,
without any dramatic incidents. Small charities scarcely sufficed to
maintain the poorer families. The others lived by pawning their clothes
and selling up the household piece by piece. Everything went to the
brokers, the wool of the mattresses, the kitchen utensils, even the
furniture. For a moment they thought themselves saved, for the small
retail shopkeepers of Montsou, killed out by Maigrat, had offered
credit to try and get back their custom; and for a week Verdonck, the
grocer, and the two bakers, Carouble and Smelten, kept open shop, but
when their advances were exhausted all three stopped. The bailiffs
were rejoicing; there only resulted a piling up of debts which would
for a long time weigh upon the miners. There was no more credit to be
had anywhere and not an old saucepan to sell; they might lie down in a
corner to die like mangy dogs.

tienne would have sold his flesh. He had given up his salary and had
gone to Marchiennes to pawn his trousers and cloth coat, happy to set
the Maheus' pot boiling once more. His boots alone remained, and he
retained these to keep a firm foothold, he said. His grief was that
the strike had come on too early, before the Provident Fund had had
time to swell. He regarded this as the only cause of the disaster, for
the workers would surely triumph over the masters on the day when they
had saved enough money to resist. And he recalled Souvarine's words
accusing the Company of pushing forward the strike to destroy the fund
at the beginning.

The sight of the settlement and of these poor people without bread or
fire overcame him. He preferred to go out and to weary himself with
distant walks. One evening, as he was coming back and passing near
Rquillart, he perceived an old woman who had fainted by the roadside.
No doubt she was dying of hunger; and having raised her he began to
shout to a girl whom he saw on the other side of the paling.

"Why! is it you?" he said, recognizing Mouquette. "Come and help me
then, we must give her something to drink."

Mouquette, moved to tears, quickly went into the shaky hovel which her
father had set up in the midst of the ruins. She came back at once with
gin and a loaf. The gin revived the old woman, who without speaking bit
greedily into the bread. She was the mother of a miner who lived at a
settlement on the Cougny side, and she had fallen there on returning
from Joiselle, where she had in vain attempted to borrow half a franc
from a sister. When she had eaten she went away dazed.

tienne stood in the open field of Rquillart, where the crumbling
sheds were disappearing beneath the brambles.

"Well, won't you come in and drink a little glass?" asked Mouquette
merrily.

And as he hesitated:

"Then you're still afraid of me?"

He followed her, won by her laughter. This bread, which she had given
so willingly, moved him. She would not take him into her father's room,
but led him into her own room, where she at once poured out two little
glasses of gin. The room was very neat and he complimented her on it.
Besides, the family seemed to want for nothing; the father continued
his duties as a groom at the Voreux while she, saying that she could
not live with folded arms, had become a laundress, which brought her in
thirty sous a day. One may amuse oneself with men but one isn't lazy
for all that.

"I say," she murmured, all at once coming and putting her arms round
him prettily, "why don't you like me?"

He could not help laughing, she had done this in so charming a way.

"But I like you very much," he replied.

"No, no, not like I mean. You know that I am dying of longing. Come, it
would give me so much pleasure."

It was true, she had desired him for six months. He still looked at her
as she clung to him, pressing him with her two tremulous arms, her face
raised with such supplicating love that he was deeply moved. There was
nothing beautiful in her large round face, with its yellow complexion
eaten by the coal; but her eyes shone with flame, a charm rose from
her skin, a trembling of desire which made her rosy and young. In face
of this gift which was so humble and so ardent he no longer dared to
refuse.

"Oh! you are willing," she stammered, delighted. "Oh! you are willing!"

And she gave herself up with the fainting awkwardness of a virgin, as
if it was for the first time, and she had never before known a man.
Then when he left her, it was she who was overcome with gratitude; she
thanked him and kissed his hands.

tienne remained rather ashamed of this good fortune. Nobody boasted
of having had Mouquette. As he went away he swore that it should not
occur again, but he preserved a friendly remembrance of her; she was a
capital girl.

When he got back to the settlement, he found serious news which made
him forget the adventure. The rumour was circulating that the Company
would, perhaps, agree to make a concession if the delegates made
a fresh attempt with the manager. At all events some captains had
spread this rumour. The truth was, that in this struggle the mine
was suffering even more than the miners. On both sides obstinacy was
piling up ruin: while labour was dying of hunger, capital was being
destroyed. Every day of rest carried away hundreds of thousands of
francs. Every machine which stops is a dead machine. Tools and material
are impaired, the money that is sunk melts away like water drunk by
the sand. Since the small stock of coal at the surface of the pits was
exhausted, customers talked of going to Belgium, so that in future they
would be threatened from that quarter. But what especially frightened
the Company, although the matter was carefully concealed, was the
increasing damage to the galleries and workings. The captains could
not cope with the repairs, the timber was falling everywhere, and
landslips were constantly taking place. Soon the disasters became so
serious that long months would be needed for repairs before hewing
could be resumed. Already stories were going about the country: at
Crvecoeur three hundred metres of road had subsided in a mass,
stopping up access to the Cinq-Paumes; at Madeleine the Maugrtout seam
was crumbling away and filling with water. The management refused to
admit this, but suddenly two accidents, one after the other, had forced
them to avow it. One morning, near Piolaine, the ground was found
cracked above the north gallery of Mirou which had fallen in the day
before; and on the following day the ground subsided within the Voreux,
shaking a corner of a suburb to such an extent that two houses nearly
disappeared.

tienne and the delegates hesitated to risk any steps without knowing
the directors' intentions. Dansaert, whom they questioned, avoided
replying: certainly, the misunderstanding was deplored, and everything
would be done to bring about an agreement; but he could say nothing
definitely. At last, they decided that they would go to M. Hennebeau
in order to have reason on their side; for they did not wish to be
accused, later on, of having refused the Company an opportunity of
acknowledging that it had been in the wrong. Only they vowed to yield
nothing and to maintain, in spite of everything, their terms, which
were alone just.

The interview took place on Tuesday morning, when the settlement was
sinking into desperate wretchedness. It was less cordial than the
first interview. Maheu was still the speaker, and he explained that
their mates had sent them to ask if these gentlemen had anything new
to say. At first M. Hennebeau affected surprise: no order had reached
him, nothing could be changed so long as the miners persisted in their
detestable rebellion; and this official stiffness produced the worst
effects, so that if the delegates had gone out of their way to offer
conciliation, the way in which they were received would only have
served to make them more obstinate. Afterwards the manager tried to
seek a basis of mutual concession; thus, if the men would accept the
separate payment for timbering, the Company would raise that payment
by the two centimes which they were accused of profiting by. Besides,
he added that he would take the offer on himself, that nothing was
settled, but that he flattered himself he could obtain this concession
from Paris. But the delegates refused, and repeated their demands: the
retention of the old system, with a rise of five centimes a tram. Then
he acknowledged that he could treat with them at once, and urged them
to accept in the name of their wives and little ones dying of hunger.
And with eyes on the ground and stiff heads they said no, always no,
with fierce vigour. They separated curtly. M. Hennebeau banged the
doors. tienne, Maheu, and the others went off stamping with their
great heels on the pavement in the mute rage of the vanquished pushed
to extremes.

Towards two o'clock the women of the settlement, on their side, made
an application to Maigrat. There was only this hope left, to bend this
man and to wrench from him another week's credit. The idea originated
with Maheude, who often counted too much on people's good-nature. She
persuaded the Brul and the Levaque to accompany her; as to Pierronne,
she excused herself, saying that she could not leave Pierron, whose
illness still continued. Other women joined the band till they numbered
quite twenty. When the inhabitants of Montsou saw them arrive, gloomy
and wretched, occupying the whole width of the road, they shook their
heads anxiously. Doors were closed, and one lady hid her plate. It was
the first time they had been seen thus, and there could not be a worse
sign: usually everything was going to ruin when the women thus took to
the roads. At Maigrat's there was a violent scene. At first, he had
made them go in, jeering and pretending to believe that they had come
to pay their debts: that was nice of them to have agreed to come and
bring the money all at once. Then, as soon as Maheude began to speak he
pretended to be enraged. Were they making fun of people? More credit!
Then they wanted to turn him into the street? No, not a single potato,
not a single crumb of bread! And he told them to be off to the grocer
Verdonck, and to the bakers Carouble and Smelten, since they now dealt
with them. The women listened with timid humility, apologizing, and
watching his eyes to see if he would relent. He began to joke, offering
his shop to the Brul if she would have him as a lover. They were all
so cowardly that they laughed at this; and the Levaque improved on it,
declaring that she was willing, she was. But he at once became abusive,
and pushed them towards the door. As they insisted, suppliantly, he
treated one brutally. The others on the pavement shouted that he had
sold himself to the Company, while Maheude, with her arms in the air,
in a burst of avenging indignation, cried out for his death, exclaiming
that such a man did not deserve to eat.

The return to the settlement was melancholy. When the women came back
with empty hands, the men looked at them and then lowered their heads.
There was nothing more to be done, the day would end without a spoonful
of soup; and the other days extended in an icy shadow, without a ray
of hope. They had made up their minds to it, and no one spoke of
surrender. This excess of misery made them still more obstinate, mute
as tracked beasts, resolved to die at the bottom of their hole rather
than come out. Who would dare to be first to speak of submission?
They had sworn with their mates to hold together, and hold together
they would, as they held together at the pit when one of them was
beneath a landslip. It was as it ought to be; it was a good school
for resignation down there. They might well tighten their belts for
a week, when they had been swallowing fire and water ever since they
were twelve years of age; and their devotion was thus augmented by the
pride of soldiers, of men proud of their profession, who in their daily
struggle with death had gained a pride in sacrifice.

With the Maheus it was a terrible evening. They were all silent, seated
before the dying fire in which the last cinders were smoking. After
having emptied the mattresses, handful by handful, they had decided
the day before to sell the clock for three francs and the room seemed
bare and dead now that the familiar tick-tack no longer filled it with
sound. The only object of luxury now, in the middle of the sideboard,
was the rose cardboard box, an old present from Maheu, which Maheude
treasured like a jewel. The two good chairs had gone; Father Bonnemort
and the children were squeezed together on an old mossy bench brought
in from the garden. And the livid twilight now coming on seemed to
increase the cold.

"What's to be done?" repeated Maheude, crouching down in the corner by
the oven.

tienne stood up, looking at the portraits of the Emperor and Empress
stuck against the wall. He would have torn them down long since if
the family had not preserved them for ornament. So he murmured, with
clenched teeth:

"And to think that we can't get two sous out of these damned idiots,
who are watching us starve!"

"If I were to take the box?" said the woman, very pale, after some
hesitation.

Maheu, seated on the edge of the table, with his legs dangling and his
head on his chest, sat up.

"No! I won't have it!"

Maheude painfully rose and walked round the room. Good God! was it
possible that they were reduced to such misery? The cupboard without
a crumb, nothing more to sell, no notion where to get a loaf! And the
fire, which was nearly out! She became angry with Alzire, whom she had
sent in the morning to glean on the pit-bank, and who had come back
with empty hands, saying that the Company would not allow gleaning. Did
it matter a hang what the Company wanted? As if they were robbing any
one by picking up the bits of lost coal! The little girl, in despair,
told how a man had threatened to hit her; then she promised to go back
next day, even if she was beaten.

"And that imp, Jeanlin," cried the mother; "where is he now, I should
like to know? He ought to have brought the salad; we can browse on
that like beasts, at all events! You will see, he won't come back.
Yesterday, too, he slept out. I don't know what he's up to; the rascal
always looks as though his belly were full."

"Perhaps," said tienne, "he picks up sous on the road."

She suddenly lifted both fists furiously.

"If I knew that! My children beg! I'd rather kill them and myself too."

Maheu had again sunk down on the edge of the table. Lnore and Henri,
astonished that they had nothing to eat, began to moan; while old
Bonnemort, in silence, philosophically rolled his tongue in his mouth
to deceive his hunger. No one spoke any more; all were becoming
benumbed beneath this aggravation of their evils; the grandfather,
coughing and spitting out the black phlegm, taken again by rheumatism
which was turning to dropsy; the father asthmatic, and with knees
swollen with water; the mother and the little ones scarred by scrofula
and hereditary anaemia. No doubt their work made this inevitable; they
only complained when the lack of food killed them off; and already they
were falling like flies in the settlement. But something must be found
for supper. My God! where was it to be found, what was to be done?

Then, in the twilight, which made the room more and more gloomy with
its dark melancholy, tienne, who had been hesitating for a moment, at
last decided with aching heart.

"Wait for me," he said. "I'll go and see somewhere."

And he went out. The idea of Mouquette had occurred to him. She would
certainly have a loaf, and would give it willingly. It annoyed him to
be thus forced to return to Rquillart; this girl would kiss his hands
with her air of an amorous servant; but one did not leave one's friends
in trouble; he would still be kind with her if need be.

"I will go and look round, too," said Maheude, in her turn. "It's too
stupid."

She reopened the door after the young man and closed it violently,
leaving the others motionless and mute in the faint light of a
candle-end which Alzire had just lighted. Outside she stopped and
thought for a moment. Then she entered the Levaque's house.

"Tell me: I lent you a loaf the other day. Could you give it me back?"

But she stopped herself. What she saw was far from encouraging; the
house spoke of misery even more than her own.

The Levaque woman, with fixed eyes, was gazing into her burnt-out fire,
while Levaque, made drunk on his empty stomach by some nail-makers,
was sleeping on the table. With his back to the wall, Bouteloup was
mechanically rubbing his shoulders with the amazement of a good-natured
fellow who has eaten up his savings, and is astonished at having to
tighten his belt.

"A loaf! ah! my dear," replied the Levaque woman, "I wanted to borrow
another from you!"

Then, as her husband groaned with pain in his sleep, she pushed his
face against the table.

"Hold your row, bloody beast! So much the better if it burns your guts!
Instead of getting people to pay for your drinks, you ought to have
asked twenty sous from a friend."

She went on relieving herself by swearing, in the midst of this dirty
household, already abandoned so long that an unbearable smell was
exhaling from the floor. Everything might smash up, she didn't care a
hang! Her son, that rascal Bbert, had also disappeared since morning,
and she shouted that it would be a good riddance if he never came back.
Then she said that she would go to bed. At least she could get warm.
She hustled Bouteloup.

"Come along, up we go. The fire's out. No need to light the candle to
see the empty plates. Well, are you coming, Louis? I tell you that we
must go to bed. We can cuddle up together there, that's a comfort. And
let this damned drunkard die here of cold by himself!"

When she found herself outside again, Maheude struck resolutely across
the gardens towards Pierron's house. She heard laughter. As she knocked
there was sudden silence. It was a full minute before the door was
opened.

"What! is it you?" exclaimed Pierronne with affected surprise. "I
thought it was the doctor."

Without allowing her to speak, she went on, pointing to Pierron, who
was seated before a large coal fire:

"Ah! he makes no progress, he makes no progress at all. His face looks
all right; it's in his belly that it takes him. Then he must have
warmth. We burn all that we've got."

Pierron, in fact, looked very well; his complexion was good and his
flesh fat. It was in vain that he breathed hard in order to play the
sick man. Besides, as Maheude came in she perceived a strong smell
of rabbit; they had certainly put the dish out of the way. There
were crumbs strewed over the table, and in the very midst she saw a
forgotten bottle of wine.

"Mother has gone to Montsou to try and get a loaf," said Pierronne
again. "We are cooling our heels waiting for her."

But her voice choked; she had followed her neighbour's glance, and
her eyes also fell on the bottle. Immediately she began again, and
narrated the story. Yes, it was wine; the Piolaine people had brought
her that bottle for her man, who had been ordered by the doctor to take
claret. And her thankfulness poured forth in a stream. What good people
they were! The young lady especially; she was not proud, going into
workpeople's houses and distributing her charities herself.

"I see," said Maheude; "I know them."

Her heart ached at the idea that the good things always go to the least
poor. It was always so, and these Piolaine people had carried water to
the river. Why had she not seen them in the settlement? Perhaps, all
the same, she might have got something out of them.

"I came," she confessed at last, "to know if there was more going with
you than with us. Have you just a little vermicelli by way of loan?"

Pierronne expressed her grief noisily.

"Nothing at all, my dear. Not what you can call a grain of semolina. If
mother hasn't come back, it's because she hasn't succeeded. We must go
to bed supperless."

At this moment crying was heard from the cellar, and she grew angry and
struck her fist against the door. It was that gadabout Lydie, whom she
had shut up, she said, to punish her for not having returned until five
o'clock, after having been roaming about the whole day. One could no
longer keep her in order; she was constantly disappearing.

Maheude, however, remained standing; she could not make up her mind to
leave. This large fire filled her with a painful sensation of comfort;
the thought that they were eating there enlarged the void in her
stomach. Evidently they had sent away the old woman and shut up the
child, to blow themselves out with their rabbit. Ah! whatever people
might say, when a woman behaved ill, that brought luck to her house.

"Good night," she said, suddenly.

Outside night had come on, and the moon behind the clouds was lighting
up the earth with a dubious glow. Instead of traversing the gardens
again, Maheude went round, despairing, afraid to go home again.
But along the dead frontages all the doors smelled of famine and
sounded hollow. What was the good of knocking? There was wretchedness
everywhere. For weeks since they had had nothing to eat. Even the odour
of onion had gone, that strong odour which revealed the settlement from
afar across the country; now there was nothing but the smell of old
vaults, the dampness of holes in which nothing lives. Vague sounds were
dying out, stifled tears, lost oaths; and in the silence which slowly
grew heavier one could hear the sleep of hunger coming on, the collapse
of bodies thrown across beds in the nightmares of empty bellies.

As she passed before the church she saw a shadow slip rapidly by. A
gleam of hope made her hasten, for she had recognized the Montsou
priest, Abb Joire, who said mass on Sundays at the settlement chapel.
No doubt he had just come out of the sacristy, where he had been called
to settle some affair. With rounded back he moved quickly on, a fat
meek man, anxious to live at peace with everybody. If he had come at
night it must have been in order not to compromise himself among the
miners. It was said, too, that he had just obtained promotion. He had
even been seen walking about with his successor, a lean man, with eyes
like live coals.

"Sir, sir!" stammered Maheude.

But he would not stop.

"Good night, good night, my good woman."

She found herself before her own door. Her legs would no longer carry
her, and she went in.

No one had stirred. Maheu still sat dejected on the edge of the table.
Old Bonnemort and the little ones were huddled together on the bench
for the sake of warmth. And they had not said a word, and the candle
had burnt so low that even light would soon fail them. At the sound of
the door the children turned their heads; but seeing that their mother
brought nothing back, they looked down on the ground again, repressing
the longing to cry, for fear of being scolded. Maheude fell back into
her place near the dying fire. They asked her no questions, and the
silence continued. All had understood, and they thought it useless to
weary themselves more by talking; they were now waiting, despairing and
without courage, in the last expectation that perhaps tienne would
unearth help somewhere. The minutes went by, and at last they no longer
reckoned on this.

When tienne reappeared, he held a cloth containing a dozen potatoes,
cooked but cold.

"That's all that I've found," he said.

With Mouquette also bread was wanting; it was her dinner which she had
forced him to take in this cloth, kissing him with all her heart.

"Thanks," he said to Maheude, who offered him his share; "I've eaten
over there."

It was not true, and he gloomily watched the children throw themselves
on the food. The father and mother also restrained themselves, in order
to leave more; but the old man greedily swallowed everything. They had
to take a potato away from him for Alzire.

Then tienne said that he had heard news. The Company, irritated by the
obstinacy of the strikers, talked of giving back their certificates
to the compromised miners. Certainly, the Company was for war. And a
more serious rumour circulated: they boasted of having persuaded a
large number of men to go down again. On the next day the Victoire and
Feutry-Cantel would be complete; even at Madeleine and Mirou there
would be a third of the men. The Maheus were furious.

"By God!" shouted the father, "if there are traitors, we must settle
their account."

And standing up, yielding to the fury of his suffering:

"To-morrow evening, to the forest! Since they won't let us come to an
understanding at the Bon-Joyeux, we can be at home in the forest!"

This cry had aroused old Bonnemort, who had grown drowsy after his
gluttony. It was the old rallying-cry, the rendezvous where the miners
of old days used to plot their resistance to the king's soldiers.

"Yes, yes, to Vandame! I'm with you if you go there!"

Maheude made an energetic gesture.

"We will all go. That will finish these injustices and treacheries."

tienne decided that the rendezvous should be announced to all the
settlements for the following evening. But the fire was dead, as with
the Levaques, and the candle suddenly went out. There was no more coal
and no more oil; they had to feel their way to bed in the intense cold
which contracted the skin. The little ones were crying.




CHAPTER VI


Jeanlin was now well and able to walk; but his legs had united so badly
that he limped on both the right and left sides, and moved with the
gait of a duck, though running as fast as formerly with the skill of a
mischievous and thieving animal.

On this evening, in the dusk on the Rquillart road, Jeanlin,
accompanied by his inseparable friends, Bbert and Lydie, was on the
watch. He had taken ambush in a vacant space, behind a paling opposite
an obscure grocery shop, situated at the corner of a lane. An old woman
who was nearly blind displayed there three or four sacks of lentils
and haricots, black with dust; and it was an ancient dried codfish,
hanging by the door and stained with fly-blows, to which his eyes were
directed. Twice already he had sent Bbert to unhook it. But each time
someone had appeared at the bend in the road. Always intruders in the
way, one could not attend to one's affairs.

A gentleman went by on horseback, and the children flattened themselves
at the bottom of the paling, for they recognized M. Hennebeau. Since
the strike he was often thus seen along the roads, riding alone amid
the rebellious settlements, ascertaining, with quiet courage, the
condition of the country. And never had a stone whistled by his ears;
he only met men who were silent and slow to salute him; most often he
came upon lovers, who cared nothing for politics and took their fill
of pleasure in holes and corners. He passed by on his trotting mare
with head directed straight forward, so as to disturb nobody, while his
heart was swelling with an unappeased desire amid this gormandizing of
free love. He distinctly saw these small rascals, the little boys on
the little girl in a heap. Even the youngsters were already amusing
themselves in their misery! His eyes grew moist, and he disappeared,
sitting stiffly on his saddle, with his frock-coat buttoned up in a
military manner.

"Damned luck!" said Jeanlin. "This will never finish. Go on, Bbert!
Hang on to its tail!"

But two men once more appeared, and the child again stifled an oath
when he heard the voice of his brother Zacharie narrating to Mouquet
how he had discovered a two-franc piece sewn into one of his wife's
petticoats. They both grinned with satisfaction, slapping each other on
the shoulder. Mouquet proposed a game of crosse for the next day; they
would leave the Avantage at two o'clock, and go to the Montoire side,
near Marchiennes. Zacharie agreed. What was the good of bothering over
the strike? as well amuse oneself, since there's nothing to do. And
they turned the corner of the road, when tienne, who was coming along
the canal, stopped them and began to talk.

"Are they going to bed here?" said Jeanlin, in exasperation. "Nearly
night; the old woman will be taking in her sacks."

Another miner came down towards Rquillart. tienne went off with him,
and as they passed the paling the child heard them speak of the forest;
they had been obliged to put off the rendezvous to the following
day, for fear of not being able to announce it in one day to all the
settlements.

"I say, there," he whispered to his two mates, "the big affair is for
to-morrow. We'll go, eh? We can get off in the afternoon."

And the road being at last free, he sent Bbert off.

"Courage! hang on to its tail. And look out! the old woman's got her
broom."

Fortunately the night had grown dark. Bbert, with a leap, hung on to
the cod so that the string broke. He ran away, waving it like a kite,
followed by the two others, all three galloping. The woman came out
of her shop in astonishment, without understanding or being able to
distinguish this band now lost in the darkness.

These scoundrels had become the terror of the country. They gradually
spread themselves over it like a horde of savages. At first they had
been satisfied with the yard at the Voreux, tumbling into the stock of
coal, from which they would emerge looking like Negroes, playing at
hide-and-seek amid the supply of wood, in which they lost themselves
as in the depths of a virgin forest. Then they had taken the pit-bank
by assault; they would seat themselves on it and slide down the bare
portions still boiling with interior fires; they glided among the
briers in the older parts, hiding for the whole day, occupied in the
quiet little games of mischievous mice. And they were constantly
enlarging their conquests, scuffling among the piles of bricks until
blood came, running about the fields and eating without bread all sorts
of milky herbs, searching the banks of the canals to take fish from the
mud and swallow them raw and pushing still farther, they travelled for
kilometres as far as the thickets of Vandame, under which they gorged
themselves with strawberries in the spring, with nuts and bilberries in
summer. Soon the immense plain belonged to them.

What drove them thus from Montsou to Marchiennes, constantly on the
roads with the eyes of young wolves, was the growing love of plunder.
Jeanlin remained the captain of these expeditions, leading the troop
on to all sorts of prey, ravaging the onion fields, pillaging the
orchards, attacking shop windows. In the country, people accused the
miners on strike, and talked of a vast organized band. One day, even,
he had forced Lydie to steal from her mother, and made her bring him
two dozen sticks of barley-sugar, which Pierronne kept in a bottle
on one of the boards in her window; and the little girl, who was
well beaten, had not betrayed him because she trembled so before his
authority. The worst was that he always gave himself the lion's share.
Bbert also had to bring him the booty, happy if the captain did not
hit him and keep it all.

For some time Jeanlin had abused his authority. He would beat Lydie as
one beats one's lawful wife, and he profited by Bbert's credulity to
send him on unpleasant adventures, amused at making a fool of this big
boy, who was stronger than himself, and could have knocked him over
with a blow of his fist. He felt contempt for both of them and treated
them as slaves, telling them that he had a princess for his mistress
and that they were unworthy to appear before her. And, in fact, during
the past week he would suddenly disappear at the end of a road or a
turning in a path, no matter where it might be, after having ordered
them with a terrible air to go back to the settlement. But first he
would pocket the booty.

This was what happened on the present occasion.

"Give it up," he said, snatching the cod from his mate's hands when
they stopped, all three, at a bend in the road near Rquillart.

Bbert protested.

"I want some, you know. I took it."

"Eh! what!" he cried. "You'll have some if I give you some. Not
to-night, sure enough; to-morrow, if there's any left."

He pushed Lydie, and placed both of them in line like soldiers
shouldering arms. Then, passing behind them:

"Now, you must stay there five minutes without turning. By God! if you
do turn, there will be beasts that will eat you up. And then you will
go straight back, and if Bbert touches Lydie on the way, I shall know
it and I shall hit you."

Then he disappeared in the shadow, so lightly that the sound of his
naked feet could not be heard. The two children remained motionless
for the five minutes without looking round, for fear of receiving a
blow from the invisible. Slowly a great affection had grown up between
them in their common terror. He was always thinking of taking her and
pressing her very tight between his arms, as he had seen others do and
she, too, would have liked it, for it would have been a change for
her to be so nicely caressed. But neither of them would have allowed
themselves to disobey. When they went away, although the night was very
dark, they did not even kiss each other; they walked side by side,
tender and despairing, certain that if they touched one another the
captain would strike them from behind.

tienne, at the same hour, had entered Rquillart. The evening before
Mouquette had begged him to return, and he returned, ashamed, feeling
an inclination which he refused to acknowledge, for this girl who
adored him like a Christ. It was, besides, with the intention of
breaking it off. He would see her, he would explain to her that she
ought no longer to pursue him, on account of the mates. It was not a
time for pleasure; it was dishonest to amuse oneself thus when people
were dying of hunger. And not having found her at home, he had decided
to wait and watch the shadows of the passers-by.

Beneath the ruined steeple the old shaft opened, half blocked up.
Above the black hole a beam stood erect, and with a fragment of roof
at the top it had the profile of a gallows; in the broken walling of
the curbs stood two trees--a mountain ash and a plane--which seemed
to grow from the depths of the earth. It was a corner of abandoned
wildness, the grassy and fibrous entry of a gulf, embarrassed with old
wood, planted with hawthorns and sloe-trees, which were peopled in the
spring by warblers in their nests. Wishing to avoid the great expense
of keeping it up, the Company, for the last ten years, had proposed to
fill up this dead pit; but they were waiting to install an air-shaft
in the Voreux, for the ventilation furnace of the two pits, which
communicated, was placed at the foot of Rquillart, of which the former
winding-shaft served as a conduit. They were content to consolidate the
tubbing by beams placed across, preventing extraction, and they had
neglected the upper galleries to watch only over the lower gallery, in
which blazed the furnace, the enormous coal fire, with so powerful a
draught that the rush of air produced the wind of a tempest from one
end to the other of the neighbouring mine. As a precaution, in order
that they could still go up and down, the order had been given to
furnish the shaft with ladders; only, as no one took charge of them,
the ladders were rotting with dampness, and in some places had already
given way. Above, a large brier stopped the entry of the passage, and,
as the first ladder had lost some rungs, it was necessary, in order to
reach it, to hang on to a root of the mountain ash, and then to take
one's chance and drop into the blackness.

tienne was waiting patiently, hidden behind a bush, when he heard a
long rustling among the branches. He thought at first that it was the
scared flight of a snake. But the sudden gleam of a match astonished
him, and he was stupefied on recognizing Jeanlin, who was lighting a
candle and burying himself in the earth. He was seized with curiosity,
and approached the hole; the child had disappeared, and a faint gleam
came from the second ladder. tienne hesitated a moment, and then let
himself go, holding on to the roots. He thought for a moment that he
was about to fall down the whole five hundred and eighty metres of
the mine, but at last he felt a rung, and descended gently. Jeanlin
had evidently heard nothing. tienne constantly saw the light sinking
beneath him, while the little one's shadow, colossal and disturbing,
danced with the deformed gait of his distorted limbs. He kicked his
legs about with the skill of a monkey, catching on with hands, feet,
or chin where the rungs were wanting. Ladders, seven metres in length,
followed one another, some still firm, others shaky, yielding and
almost broken; the steps were narrow and green, so rotten that one
seemed to walk in moss; and as one went down the heat grew suffocating,
the heat of an oven proceeding from the air-shaft which was,
fortunately, not very active now the strike was on, or when the furnace
devoured its five thousand kilograms of coal a day, one could not have
risked oneself here without scorching one's hair.

"What a dammed little toad!" exclaimed tienne in a stifled voice;
"where the devil is he going to?"

Twice he had nearly fallen. His feet slid on the damp wood. If he had
only had a candle like the child! but he struck himself every minute;
he was only guided by the vague gleam that fled beneath him. He had
already reached the twentieth ladder, and the descent still continued.
Then he counted them: twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, and he
still went down and down. His head seemed to be swelling with the heat,
and he thought that he was falling into a furnace. At last he reached a
landing-place, and he saw the candle going off along a gallery. Thirty
ladders, that made about two hundred and ten metres.

"Is he going to drag me about long?" he thought. "He must be going to
bury himself in the stable."

But on the left, the path which led to the stable was closed by a
landslip. The journey began again, now more painful and more dangerous.
Frightened bats flew about and clung to the roof of the gallery. He
had to hasten so as not to lose sight of the light; only where the
child passed with ease, with the suppleness of a serpent, he could
not glide through without bruising his limbs. This gallery, like all
the older passages, was narrow, and grew narrower every day from the
constant fall of soil; at certain places it was a mere tube which would
eventually be effaced. In this strangling labour the torn and broken
wood became a peril, threatening to saw into his flesh, or to run him
through with the points of splinters, sharp as swords. He could only
advance with precaution, on his knees or belly, feeling in the darkness
before him. Suddenly a band of rats stamped over him, running from his
neck to his feet in their galloping flight.

"Blast it all! haven't we got to the end yet?" he grumbled, with aching
back and out of breath.

They were there. At the end of a kilometre the tube enlarged, they
reached a part of the gallery which was admirably preserved. It was
the end of the old haulage passage cut across the bed like a natural
grotto. He was obliged to stop, he saw the child afar, placing his
candle between two stones, and putting himself at ease with the quiet
and relieved air of a man who is glad to be at home again. This
gallery-end was completely changed into a comfortable dwelling. In
a corner on the ground a pile of hay made a soft couch; on some old
planks, placed like a table, there were bread, potatoes, and bottles of
gin already opened; it was a real brigand's cavern, with booty piled up
for weeks, even useless booty like soap and blacking, stolen for the
pleasure of stealing. And the child, quite alone in the midst of this
plunder, was enjoying it like a selfish brigand.

"I say, then, is this how you make fun of people?" cried tienne, when
he had breathed for a moment. "You come and gorge yourself here, when
we are dying of hunger up above?"

Jeanlin, astounded, was trembling. But recognizing the young man, he
quickly grew calm.

"Will you come and dine with me?" he said at last. "Eh? a bit of
grilled cod? You shall see."

He had not let go his cod, and he began to scrape off the fly-blows
properly with a fine new knife, one of those little dagger knives, with
bone handles, on which mottoes are inscribed. This one simply bore the
word "Amour."

"You have a fine knife," remarked tienne.

"It's a present from Lydie," replied Jeanlin, who neglected to add
that Lydie had stolen it, by his orders, from a huckster at Montsou,
stationed before the Tte-Coupe Bar.

Then, as he still scraped, he added proudly:

"Isn't it comfortable in my house? It's a bit warmer than up above, and
it feels a lot better!"

tienne had seated himself, and was amused in making him talk. He was
no longer angry, he felt interested in this debauched child, who was
so brave and so industrious in his vices. And, in fact, he tasted
a certain comfort in the bottom of this hole; the heat was not too
great, an equal temperature reigned here at all seasons, the warmth of
a bath, while the rough December wind was chapping the skins of the
miserable people on the earth. As they grew old, the galleries became
purified from noxious gases, all the fire-damp had gone, and one only
smelled now the odour of old fermented wood, a subtle ethereal odour,
as if sharpened with a dash of cloves. This wood, besides, had become
curious to look at, with a yellowish pallor of marble, fringed with
whitish thread lace, flaky vegetations which seemed to drape it with an
embroidery of silk and pearls. In other places the timber was bristling
with toadstools. And there were flights of white butterflies, snowy
flies and spiders, a decolorized population for ever ignorant of the
sun.

"Then you're not afraid?" asked tienne.

Jeanlin looked at him in astonishment.

"Afraid of what? I am quite alone."

But the cod was at last scraped. He lighted a little fire of wood,
brought out the pan and grilled it. Then he cut a loaf into two. It was
a terribly salt feast, but exquisite all the same for strong stomachs.

tienne had accepted his share.

"I am not astonished you get fat, while we are all growing lean. Do you
know that it is beastly to stuff yourself like this? And the others?
you don't think of them!"

"Oh! why are the others such fools?"

"Well, you're right to hide yourself, for if your father knew you stole
he would settle you."

"What! when the bourgeois are stealing from us! It's you who are always
saying so. If I nabbed this loaf at Maigrat's you may be pretty sure
it's a loaf he owed us."

The young man was silent, with his mouth full, and felt troubled. He
looked at him, with his muzzle, his green eyes, his large ears, a
degenerate abortion, with an obscure intelligence and savage cunning,
slowly slipping back into the animality of old. The mine which had made
him had just finished him by breaking his legs.

"And Lydie?" asked tienne again; "do you bring her here sometimes?"

Jeanlin laughed contemptuously.

"The little one? Ah, no, not I; women blab."

And he went on laughing, filled with immense disdain for Lydie and
Bbert. Who had ever seen such boobies? To think that they swallowed
all his humbug, and went away with empty hands while he ate the cod in
this warm place, tickled his sides with amusement. Then he concluded,
with the gravity of a little philosopher:

"Much better be alone, then there's no falling out."

tienne had finished his bread. He drank a gulp of the gin. For a
moment he asked himself if he ought not to make a bad return for
Jeanlin's hospitality by bringing him up to daylight by the ear, and
forbidding him to plunder any more by the threat of telling everything
to his father. But as he examined this deep retreat, an idea occurred
to him. Who knows if there might not be need for it, either for mates
or for himself, in case things should come to the worst up above! He
made the child swear not to sleep out, as had sometimes happened when
he forgot himself in his hay, and taking a candle-end, he went away
first, leaving him to pursue quietly his domestic affairs.

Mouquette, seated on a beam in spite of the great cold, had grown
desperate in waiting for him. When she saw him she leapt on to his
neck; and it was as though he had plunged a knife into her heart when
he said that he wished to see her no more. Good God! why? Did she not
love him enough? Fearing to yield to the desire to enter with her, he
drew her towards the road, and explained to her as gently as possible
that she was compromising him in the eyes of his mates, that she was
compromising the political cause. She was astonished; what had that
got to do with politics? At last the thought occurred to her that
he blushed at being seen with her. She was not wounded, however; it
was quite natural; and she proposed that he should rebuff her before
people, so as to seem to have broken with her. But he would see her
just once sometimes. In distraction she implored him; she swore to keep
out of sight; she would not keep him five minutes. He was touched,
but still refused. It was necessary. Then, as he left her, he wished
at least to kiss her. They had gradually reached the first houses of
Montsou, and were standing with their arms round one another beneath a
large round moon, when a woman passed near them with a sudden start, as
though she had knocked against a stone.

"Who is that?" asked tienne, anxiously.

"It's Catherine," replied Mouquette. "She's coming back from Jean-Bart."

The woman now was going away, with lowered head and feeble limbs,
looking very tired. And the young man gazed at her, in despair at
having been seen by her, his heart aching with an unreasonable remorse.
Had she not been with a man? Had she not made him suffer with the same
suffering here, on this Rquillart road, when she had given herself to
that man? But, all the same, he was grieved to have done the like to
her.

"Shall I tell you what it is?" whispered Mouquette, in tears, as she
left him. "If you don't want me it's because you want someone else."

On the next day the weather was superb; it was one of those clear
frosty days, the beautiful winter days when the hard earth rings like
crystal beneath the feet. Jeanlin had gone off at one o'clock, but
he had to wait for Bbert behind the church, and they nearly set out
without Lydie, whose mother had again shut her up in the cellar, and
only now liberated her to put a basket on her arm, telling her that
if she did not bring it back full of dandelions she should be shut up
with the rats all night long. She was frightened, therefore, and wished
to go at once for salad. Jeanlin dissuaded her; they would see later
on. For a long time Poland, Rasseneur's big rabbit, had attracted his
attention. He was passing before the Avantage when, just then, the
rabbit came out on to the road. With a leap he seized her by the ears,
stuffed her into the little girl's basket, and all three rushed away.
They would amuse themselves finely by making her run like a dog as far
as the forest.

But they stopped to gaze at Zacharie and Mouquet, who, after having
drunk a glass with two other mates, had begun their big game of
crosse. The stake was a new cap and a red handkerchief, deposited
with Rasseneur. The four players, two against two, were bidding for
the first turn from the Voreux to the Paillot farm, nearly three
kilometres; and it was Zacharie who won, with seven strokes, while
Mouquet required eight. They had placed the ball, the little boxwood
egg, on the pavement with one end up. Each was holding his crosse, the
mallet with its bent iron, long handle, and tight-strung network. Two
o'clock struck as they set out. Zacharie, in a masterly manner, at his
first stroke, composed of a series of three, sent the ball more than
four hundred yards across the beetroot fields; for it was forbidden to
play in the villages and on the streets, where people might be killed.
Mouquet, who was also a good player, sent off the ball with so vigorous
an arm that his single stroke brought the ball a hundred and fifty
metres behind. And the game went on, backwards and forwards, always
running, their feet bruised by the frozen ridges of the ploughed fields.

At first Jeanlin, Bbert, and Lydie had trotted behind the players,
delighted with their vigorous strokes. Then they remembered Poland,
whom they were shaking up in the basket; and, leaving the game in the
open country, they took out the rabbit, inquisitive to see how fast
she could run. She went off, and they fled after her; it was a chase
lasting an hour at full speed, with constant turns, with shouts to
frighten her, and arms opened and closed on emptiness. If she had not
been at the beginning of pregnancy they would never have caught her
again.

As they were panting the sound of oaths made them turn their heads.
They had just come upon the crosse party again, and Zacharie had nearly
split open his brother's skull. The players were now at their fourth
turn. From the Paillot farm they had gone off to the Quatre-Chemins,
then from the Quatre-Chemins to Montoire; and now they were going in
six strokes from Montoire to Pr-des-Vaches. That made two leagues and
a half in an hour; and, besides, they had had drinks at the Estaminet
Vincent and at the Trois-Sages Bar. Mouquet this time was ahead. He had
two more strokes to play, and his victory was certain, when Zacharie,
grinning as he availed himself of his privilege, played with so much
skill that the ball rolled into a deep pit. Mouquet's partner could
not get it out; it was a disaster. All four shouted; the party was
excited, for they were neck to neck; it was necessary to begin again.
From the Pr-des-Vaches it was not two kilometres to the point of
Herbes-Rousses, in five strokes. There they would refresh themselves at
Lerenard's.

But Jeanlin had an idea. He let them go on, and pulled out of his
pocket a piece of string which he tied to one of Poland's legs, the
left hind leg. And it was very amusing. The rabbit ran before the three
young rascals, waddling along in such an extraordinary manner that they
had never laughed so much before. Afterwards they fastened it round her
neck, and let her run off; and, as she grew tired, they dragged her on
her belly or on her back, just like a little carriage. That lasted for
more than an hour. She was moaning when they quickly put her back into
the basket, near the wood at Cruchot, on hearing the players whose game
they had once more came across.

Zacharie, Mouquet, and the two others were getting over the kilometres,
with no other rest than the time for a drink at all the inns which they
had fixed on as their goals. From the Herbes-Rousses they had gone on
to Buchy, then to Croix-de-Pierre, then to Chamblay. The earth rang
beneath the helter-skelter of their feet, rushing untiringly after the
ball, which bounded over the ice; the weather was good, they did not
fall in, they only ran the risk of breaking their legs. In the dry air
the great crosse blows exploded like firearms. Their muscular hands
grasped the strung handle; their entire bodies were bent forward, as
though to slay an ox. And this went on for hours, from one end of the
plain to the other, over ditches and hedges and the slopes of the road,
the low walls of the enclosures. One needed to have good bellows in
one's chest and iron hinges in one's knees. The pikemen thus rubbed
off the rust of the mine with impassioned zeal. There were some so
enthusiastic at twenty-five that they could do ten leagues. At forty
they played no more; they were too heavy.

Five o'clock struck; the twilight was already coming on. One more turn
to the Forest of Vandame, to decide who had gained the cap and the
handkerchief. And Zacharie joked, with his chaffing indifference for
politics; it would be fine to tumble down over there in the midst of
the mates. As to Jeanlin, ever since leaving the settlement he had
been aiming at the forest, though apparently only scouring the fields.
With an indignant gesture he threatened Lydie, who was full of remorse
and fear, and talked of going back to the Voreux to gather dandelions.
Were they going to abandon the meeting? he wanted to know what the old
people would say. He pushed Bbert, and proposed to enliven the end of
the journey as far as the trees by detaching Poland and pursuing her
with stones. His real idea was to kill her; he wanted to take her off
and eat her at the bottom of his hole at Rquillart. The rabbit ran
ahead, with nose in the air and ears back; a stone grazed her back,
another cut her tail, and, in spite of the growing darkness, she would
have been done for if the young rogues had not noticed tienne and
Maheu standing in the middle of a glade. They threw themselves on the
animal in desperation, and put her back in the basket. Almost at the
same minute Zacharie, Mouquet, and the two others, with their last blow
at crosse, drove the ball within a few metres of the glade. They all
came into the midst of the rendezvous.

Through the whole country, by the roads and pathways of the flat plain,
ever since twilight, there had been a long procession, a rustling of
silent shadows, moving separately or in groups towards the violet
thickets of the forest. Every settlement was emptied, the women and
children themselves set out as if for a walk beneath the great clear
sky. Now the roads were growing dark; this walking crowd, all gliding
towards the same goal, could no longer be distinguished. But one felt
it, the confused tramping moved by one soul. Between the hedges, among
the bushes, there was only a light rustling, a vague rumour of the
voices of the night.

M. Hennebeau, who was at this hour returning home mounted on his mare,
listened to these vague sounds. He had met couples, long rows of
strollers, on this beautiful winter night. More lovers, who were going
to take their pleasure, mouth to mouth, behind the walls. Was it not
what he always met, girls tumbled over at the bottom of every ditch,
beggars who crammed themselves with the only joy that cost nothing?
And these fools complained of life, when they could take their supreme
fill of this happiness of love! Willingly would he have starved as they
did if he could begin life again with a woman who would give herself
to him on a heap of stones, with all her strength and all her heart.
His misfortune was without consolation, and he envied these wretches.
With lowered head he went back, riding his horse at a slackened pace,
rendered desperate by these long sounds, lost in the depth of the black
country, in which he heard only kisses.




CHAPTER VII


It was the Plan-des-Dames, that vast glade just opened up by the
felling of trees. It spread out in a gentle slope, surrounded by
tall thickets and superb beeches with straight regular trunks, which
formed a white colonnade patched with green lichens; fallen giants
were also lying in the grass, while on the left a mass of logs formed
a geometrical cube. The cold was sharpening with the twilight and the
frozen moss crackled beneath the feet. There was black darkness on the
earth while the tall branches showed against the pale sky, where a full
moon coming above the horizon would soon extinguish the stars.

Nearly three thousand colliers had come to the rendezvous, a swarming
crowd of men, women, and children, gradually filling the glade and
spreading out afar beneath the trees. Late arrivals were still coming
up, a flood of heads drowned in shadow and stretching as far as the
neighbouring copses. A rumbling arose from them, like that of a storm,
in this motionless and frozen forest.

At the top, dominating the slope, tienne stood with Rasseneur and
Maheu. A quarrel had broken out, one could hear their voices in
sudden bursts. Near them some men were listening: Levaque, with
clenched fists; Pierron, turning his back and much annoyed that he
had no longer been able to feign a fever. There were also Father
Bonnemort and old Mouque, seated side by side on a stump, lost in deep
meditation. Then behind were the chaffers, Zacharie, Mouquet, and
others who had come to make fun of the thing; while gathered together
in a very different spirit the women in a group were as serious as
if at church. Maheude silently shook her head at the Levaque woman's
muttered oaths. Philomne was coughing, her bronchitis having come back
with the winter. Only Mouquette was showing her teeth with laughter,
amused at the way in which Mother Brul was abusing her daughter, an
unnatural creature who had sent her away that she might gorge herself
with rabbit, a creature who had sold herself and who fattened on her
man's cowardice. And Jeanlin had planted himself on the pile of wood,
hoisting up Lydie and making Bbert follow him, all three higher up in
the air than any one else.

The quarrel was raised by Rasseneur, who wished to proceed formally
to the election of officers. He was enraged by his defeat at the
Bon-Joyeux, and had sworn to have his revenge, for he flattered himself
that he could regain his old authority when he was once face to face,
not with the delegates, but with the miners themselves. tienne was
disgusted, and thought the idea of officers was ridiculous in this
forest. They ought to act in a revolutionary fashion, like savages,
since they were tracked like wolves.

As the dispute threatened to drag on, he took possession of the crowd
at once by jumping on to the trunk of a tree and shouting:

"Comrades! comrades!"

The confused roar of the crowd died down into a long sigh, while Maheu
stifled Rasseneur's protestations. tienne went on in a loud voice.

"Comrades, since they forbid us to speak, since they send the police
after us as if we were robbers, we have come to talk here! Here we are
free, we are at home. No one can silence us any more than they can
silence the birds and beasts!"

A thunder of cries and exclamations responded to him.

"Yes, yes! the forest is ours, we can talk here. Go on."

Then tienne stood for a moment motionless on the tree-trunk. The moon,
still beneath the horizon, only lit up the topmost branches, and the
crowd, remaining in the darkness, stood above it at the top of the
slope like a bar of shadow.

He raised his arm with a slow movement and began. But his voice was not
fierce; he spoke in the cold tones of a simple envoy of the people,
who was rendering his account. He was delivering the discourse which
the commissioner of police had cut short at the Bon-Joyeux; and he
began by a rapid history of the strike, affecting a certain scientific
eloquence--facts, nothing but facts. At first he spoke of his dislike
to the strike; the miners had not desired it, it was the management
which had provoked it with the new timbering tariff. Then he recalled
the first step taken by the delegates in going to the manager, the
bad faith of the directors; and, later on, the second step, the tardy
concession, the ten centimes given up, after the attempt to rob them.
Now he showed by figures the exhaustion of the Provident Fund, and
pointed out the use that had been made of the help sent, briefly
excusing the International, Pluchart and the others, for not being able
to do more for them in the midst of the cares of their conquest of the
world. So the situation was getting worse every day; the Company was
giving back certificates and threatening to hire men from Belgium;
besides, it was intimidating the weak, and had forced a certain number
of miners to go down again. He preserved his monotonous voice, as if to
insist on the bad news; he said that hunger was victorious, that hope
was dead, and that the struggle had reached the last feverish efforts
of courage. And then he suddenly concluded, without raising his voice:

"It is in these circumstances, mates, that you have to take a decision
to-night. Do you want the strike to go on? and if so, what do you
expect to do to beat the Company?"

A deep silence fell from the starry sky. The crowd, which could not be
seen, was silent in the night beneath these words which choked every
heart, and a sigh of despair could be heard through the trees.

But tienne was already continuing, with a change in his voice. It
was no longer the secretary of the association who was speaking; it
was the chief of a band, the apostle who was bringing truth. Could it
be that any were cowardly enough to go back on their word? What! They
were to suffer in vain for a month, and then to go back to the pits,
with lowered heads, so that the everlasting wretchedness might begin
over again! Would it not be better to die at once in the effort to
destroy this tyranny of capital, which was starving the worker? Always
to submit to hunger up to the moment when hunger will again throw the
calmest into revolt, was it not a foolish game which could not go on
for ever? And he pointed to the exploited miners, bearing alone the
disasters of every crisis, reduced to go without food as soon as the
necessities of competition lowered net prices. No, the timbering tariff
could not be accepted; it was only a disguised effort to economize on
the Company's part; they wanted to rob every man of an hour's work a
day. It was too much this time; the day was coming when the miserable,
pushed to extremity, would deal justice.

He stood with his arms in the air. At the word "justice" the crowd,
shaken by a long shudder, broke out into applause which rolled along
with the sound of dry leaves. Voices cried:

"Justice! it is time! Justice!"

Gradually tienne grew heated. He had not Rasseneur's easy flowing
abundance. Words often failed him, he had to force his phrases,
bringing them out with an effort which he emphasized by a movement of
his shoulders. Only in these continual shocks he came upon familiar
images which seized on his audience by their energy; while his
workman's gestures, his elbows in and then extended, with his fists
thrust out, his jaw suddenly advanced as if to bite, had also an
extraordinary effect on his mates. They all said that if he was not big
he made himself heard.

"The wage system is a new form of slavery," he began again, in a more
sonorous voice. "The mine ought to belong to the miner, as the sea
belongs to the fisherman, and the earth to the peasant. Do you see? The
mine belongs to you, to all of you who, for a century, have paid for it
with so much blood and misery!"

He boldly entered on obscure questions of law, and lost himself in the
difficulties of the special regulations concerning mines. The subsoil,
like the soil, belonged to the nation: only an odious privilege gave
the monopoly of it to the Companies; all the more since, at Montsou,
the pretended legality of the concession was complicated by treaties
formerly made with the owners of the old fiefs, according to the
ancient custom of Hainault. The miners, then, had only to reconquer
their property; and with extended hands he indicated the whole country
beyond the forest. At this moment the moon, which had risen above the
horizon, lit him up as it glided from behind the high branches. When
the crowd, which was still in shadow, saw him thus, white with light,
distributing fortune with his open hands, they applauded anew by
prolonged clapping.

"Yes, yes, he's right. Bravo!"

Then tienne trotted out his favourite subject, the assumption of the
instruments of production by the collectivity, as he kept on saying
in a phrase the pedantry of which greatly pleased him. At the present
time his evolution was completed. Having set out with the sentimental
fraternity of the novice and the need for reforming the wage system, he
had reached the political idea of its suppression. Since the meeting
at the Bon-Joyeux his collectivism, still humanitarian and without a
formula, had stiffened into a complicated programme which he discussed
scientifically, article by article. First, he affirmed that freedom
could only be obtained by the destruction of the state. Then, when the
people had obtained possession of the government, reforms would begin:
return to the primitive commune, substitution of an equal and free
family for the moral and oppressive family; absolute equality, civil,
political, and economic; individual independence guaranteed, thanks
to the possession of the integral product of the instruments of work;
finally, free vocational education, paid for by the collectivity. This
led to the total reconstruction of the old rotten society; he attacked
marriage, the right of bequest, he regulated every one's fortune, he
threw down the iniquitous monument of the dead centuries with a great
movement of his arm, always the same movement, the movement of the
reaper who is cutting down a ripe harvest. And then with the other hand
he reconstructed; he built up the future humanity, the edifice of truth
and justice rising in the dawn of the twentieth century. In this state
of mental tension reason trembled, and only the sectarian's fixed idea
was left. The scruples of sensibility and of good sense were lost;
nothing seemed easier than the realization of this new world. He had
foreseen everything; he spoke of it as of a machine which he could put
together in two hours, and he stuck at neither fire nor blood.

"Our turn is come," he broke out for the last time. "Now it is for us
to have power and wealth!"

The cheering rolled up to him from the depths of the forest. The moon
now whitened the whole of the glade, and cut into living waves the sea
of heads, as far as the dimly visible copses in the distance between
the great grey trunks. And in the icy air there was a fury of faces,
of gleaming eyes, of open mouths, a rut of famishing men, women, and
children, let loose on the just pillage of the ancient wealth they had
been deprived of. They no longer felt the cold, these burning words
had warmed them to the bone. Religious exaltation raised them from the
earth, a fever of hope like that of the Christians of the early Church
awaiting the near coming of justice. Many obscure phrases had escaped
them, they could not properly understand this technical and abstract
reasoning; but the very obscurity and abstraction still further
enlarged the field of promises and lifted them into a dazzling region.
What a dream! to be masters, to suffer no more, to enjoy at last!

"That's it, by God! it's our turn now! Down with the exploiters."

The women were delirious; Maheude, losing her calmness, was seized
with the vertigo of hunger, the Levaque woman shouted, old Brul,
carried out of herself, was brandishing her witch-like arms, Philomne
was shaken by a spasm of coughing, and Mouquette was so excited that
she cried out words of tenderness to the orator. Among the men,
Maheu was won over and shouted with anger, between Pierron who was
trembling and Levaque who was talking too much; while the chaffers,
Zacharie and Mouquet, though trying to make fun of things, were feeling
uncomfortable and were surprised that their mate could talk on so long
without having a drink. But on top of the pile of wood, Jeanlin was
making more noise than any one, egging on Bbert and Lydie and shaking
the basket in which Poland lay.

The clamour began again. tienne was enjoying the intoxication of his
popularity. He held power, as it were, materialized in these three
thousand breasts, whose hearts he could move with a word. Souvarine,
if he had cared to come, would have applauded his ideas so far as he
recognized them, pleased with his pupil's progress in anarchism and
satisfied with the programme, except the article on education, a relic
of silly sentimentality, for men needed to be dipped in a bath of holy
and salutary ignorance. As to Rasseneur, he shrugged his shoulders with
contempt and anger.

"You shall let me speak," he shouted to tienne.

The latter jumped from the tree-trunk.

"Speak, we shall see if they'll hear you."

Already Rasseneur had replaced him, and with a gesture demanded
silence. But the noise did not cease; his name went round from the
first ranks, who had recognized him, to the last, lost beneath the
beeches, and they refused to hear him; he was an overturned idol, the
mere sight of him angered his old disciples. His facile elocution,
his flowing, good-natured speech, which had so long charmed them, was
now treated like warm gruel made to put cowards to sleep. In vain he
talked through the noise, trying to take up again his discourse of
conciliation, the impossibility of changing the world by a stroke of
law, the necessity of allowing the social evolution time to accomplish
itself; they joked him, they hissed him; his defeat at the Bon-Joyeux
was now beyond repair. At last they threw handfuls of frozen moss at
him, and a woman cried in a shrill voice:

"Down with the traitor!"

He explained that the miner could not be the proprietor of the mine, as
the weaver is of his loom, and he said that he preferred sharing in the
benefits, the interested worker becoming the child of the house.

"Down with the traitor!" repeated a thousand voices, while stones began
to whistle by.

Then he turned pale, and despair filled his eyes with tears. His whole
existence was crumbling down; twenty years of ambitious comradeship
were breaking down beneath the ingratitude of the crowd. He came down
from the tree-trunk, with no strength to go on, struck to the heart.

"That makes you laugh," he stammered, addressing the triumphant
tienne. "Good! I hope your turn will come. It will come, I tell you!"

And as if to reject all responsibility for the evils which he foresaw,
he made a large gesture, and went away alone across the country, pale
and silent.

Hoots arose, and then they were surprised to see Father Bonnemort
standing on the trunk and about to speak in the midst of the tumult.
Up till now Mouque and he had remained absorbed, with that air that
they always had of reflecting on former things. No doubt he was
yielding to one of those sudden crises of garrulity which sometimes
made the past stir in him so violently that recollections rose and
flowed from his lips for hours at a time. There was deep silence, and
they listened to this old man, who was like a pale spectre beneath
the moon, and as he narrated things without any immediate relation
with the discussion--long histories which no one could understand--the
impression was increased. He was talking of his youth; he described
the death of his two uncles who were crushed at the Voreux; then he
turned to the inflammation of the lungs which had carried off his
wife. He kept to his main idea, however: things had never gone well
and never would go well. Thus in the forest five hundred of them had
come together because the king would not lessen the hours of work; but
he stopped short, and began to tell of another strike--he had seen so
many! They all broke out under these trees, here at the Plan-des-Dames,
lower down at the Charbonnerie, still farther towards the Saut-du-Loup.
Sometimes it froze, sometimes it was hot. One evening it had rained so
much that they had gone back again without being able to say anything,
and the king's soldiers came up and it finished with volleys of
musketry.

"We raised our hands like this, and we swore not to go back again. Ah!
I have sworn; yes, I have sworn!"

The crowd listened gapingly, feeling disturbed, when tienne, who had
watched the scene, jumped on to the fallen tree, keeping the old man
at his side. He had just recognized Chaval among their friends in the
first row. The idea that Catherine must be there had roused a new
ardour within him, the desire to be applauded in her presence.

"Mates, you have heard; this is one of our old men, and this is what he
has suffered, and what our children will suffer if we don't have done
with the robbers and butchers."

He was terrible; never had he spoken so violently. With one arm he
supported old Bonnemort, exhibiting him as a banner of misery and
mourning, and crying for vengeance. In a few rapid phrases he went
back to the first Maheu. He showed the whole family used up at the
mine, devoured by the Company, hungrier than ever after a hundred
years of work; and contrasting with the Maheus he pointed to the big
bellies of the directors sweating gold, a whole band of shareholders,
going on for a century like kept women, doing nothing but enjoy with
their bodies. Was it not fearful? a race of men dying down below, from
father to son, so that bribes of wine could be given to ministers, and
generations of great lords and bourgeois could give feasts or fatten
by their firesides! He had studied the diseases of the miners. He
made them all march past with their awful details: anaemia, scrofula,
black bronchitis, the asthma which chokes, and the rheumatism which
paralyses. These wretches were thrown as food to the engines and penned
up like beasts in the settlements. The great companies absorbed them,
regulating their slavery, threatening to enrol all the workers of the
nation, millions of hands, to bring fortune to a thousand idlers. But
the miner was no longer an ignorant brute, crushed within the bowels
of the earth. An army was springing up from the depths of the pits, a
harvest of citizens whose seed would germinate and burst through the
earth some sunny day. And they would see then if, after forty years of
service, any one would dare to offer a pension of a hundred and fifty
francs to an old man of sixty who spat out coal and whose legs were
swollen with the water from the cuttings. Yes! labour would demand
an account from capital: that impersonal god, unknown to the worker,
crouching down somewhere in his mysterious sanctuary, where he sucked
the life out of the starvelings who nourished him! They would go down
there; they would at last succeed in seeing his face by the gleam of
incendiary fires, they would drown him in blood, that filthy swine,
that monstrous idol, gorged with human flesh!

He was silent, but his arm, still extended in space, indicated the
enemy, down there, he knew not where, from one end of the earth to the
other. This time the clamour of the crowd was so great that people at
Montsou heard it, and looked towards Vandame, seized with anxiety at
the thought that some terrible landslip had occurred. Night-birds rose
above the trees in the clear open sky.

He now concluded his speech.

"Mates, what is your decision? Do you vote for the strike to go on?"

Their voices yelled, "Yes! yes!"

"And what steps do you decide on? We are sure of defeat if cowards go
down to-morrow."

Their voices rose again with the sound of a tempest:

"Kill the cowards!"

"Then you decide to call them back to duty and to their sworn word.
This is what we could do: present ourselves at the pits, bring back the
traitors by our presence, show the Company that we are all agreed, and
that we are going to die rather than yield."

"That's it. To the pits! to the pits!"

While he was speaking tienne had looked for Catherine among the pale
shouting heads before him. She was certainly not there, but he still
saw Chaval, affecting to jeer, shrugging his shoulders, but devoured by
jealousy and ready to sell himself for a little of this popularity.

"And if there are any spies among us, mates," tienne went on, "let
them look out; they're known. Yes, I can see Vandame colliers here who
have not left their pit."

"Is that meant for me?" asked Chaval, with an air of bravado.

"For you, or for any one else. But, since you speak, you ought to
understand that those who eat have nothing to do with those who are
starving. You work at Jean-Bart."

A chaffing voice interrupted:

"Oh! he work! he's got a wife who works for him."

Chaval swore, while the blood rose to his face.

"By God! is it forbidden to work, then?"

"Yes!" said tienne, "when your mates are enduring misery for the good
of all, it is forbidden to go over, like a selfish sneaking coward,
to the masters' side. If the strike had been general we should have
got the best of it long ago. Not a single man at Vandame ought to have
gone down when Montsou is resting. To accomplish the great stroke, work
should be stopped in the entire country, at Monsieur Deneulin's as well
as here. Do you understand? there are only traitors in the Jean Bart
cuttings; you're all traitors!"

The crowd around Chaval grew threatening, and fists were raised and
cries of "Kill him! kill him!" began to be uttered. He had grown pale.
But, in his infuriated desire to triumph over tienne, an idea restored
him.

"Listen to me, then! come to-morrow to Jean-Bart, and you shall see if
I'm working! We're on your side; they've sent me to tell you so. The
fires must be extinguished, and the engine-men, too, must go on strike.
All the better if the pumps do stop! the water will destroy the pits
and everything will be done for!"

He was furiously applauded in his turn, and now tienne himself was
outflanked. Other orators succeeded each other from the tree-trunk,
gesticulating amid the tumult, and throwing out wild propositions.
It was a mad outburst of faith, the impatience of a religious sect
which, tired of hoping for the expected miracle, had at last decided
to provoke it. These heads, emptied by famine, saw everything red, and
dreamed of fire and blood in the midst of a glorious apotheosis from
which would arise universal happiness. And the tranquil moon bathed
this surging sea, the deep forest encircled with its vast silence this
cry of massacre. The frozen moss crackled beneath the heels of the
crowd, while the beeches, erect in their strength, with the delicate
tracery of their black branches against the white sky, neither saw nor
heard the miserable beings who writhed at their feet.

There was some pushing, and Maheude found herself near Maheu. Both of
them, driven out of their ordinary good sense, and carried away by
the slow exasperation which had been working within them for months,
approved Levaque, who went to extremes by demanding the heads of the
engineers. Pierron had disappeared. Bonnemort and Mouque were both
talking together, saying vague violent things which nobody heard. For a
joke Zacharie demanded the demolition of the churches, while Mouquet,
with his crosse in his hand, was beating it against the ground for
the sake of increasing the row. The women were furious. The Levaque,
with her fists to her hips, was setting to with Philomne, whom she
accused of having laughed; Mouquette talked of attacking the gendarmes
by kicking them somewhere; Mother Brul, who had just slapped Lydie on
finding her without either basket or salad, went on launching blows
into space against all the masters whom she would like to have got at.
For a moment Jeanlin was in terror, Bbert having learned through a
trammer that Madame Rasseneur had seen them steal Poland; but when he
had decided to go back and quietly release the beast at the door of
the Avantage, he shouted louder than ever, and opened his new knife,
brandishing the blade and proud of its glitter.

"Mates! mates!" repeated the exhausted tienne, hoarse with the effort
to obtain a moment's silence for a definite understanding.

At last they listened.

"Mates! to-morrow morning at Jean-Bart, is it agreed?"

"Yes! yes! at Jean-Bart! death to the traitors!"

The tempest of these three thousand voices filled the sky, and died
away in the pure brightness of the moon.




PART FIVE




CHAPTER I


At four o'clock the moon had set, and the night was very dark.
Everything was still asleep at Deneulin's; the old brick house stood
mute and gloomy, with closed doors and windows, at the end of the large
ill-kept garden which separated it from the Jean-Bart mine. The other
frontage faced the deserted road to Vandame, a large country town,
about three kilometres off, hidden behind the forest.

Deneulin, tired after a day spent in part below, was snoring with his
face toward the wall, when he dreamt that he had been called. At last
he awoke, and really hearing a voice, got out and opened the window.
One of his captains was in the garden.

"What is it, then?" he asked.

"There's a rebellion, sir; half the men will not work, and are
preventing the others from going down."

He scarcely understood, with head heavy and dazed with sleep, and the
great cold struck him like an icy douche.

"Then make them go down, by George!" he stammered.

"It's been going on an hour," said the captain. "Then we thought it
best to come for you. Perhaps you will be able to persuade them."

"Very good; I'll go."

He quickly dressed himself, his mind quite clear now, and very
anxious. The house might have been pillaged; neither the cook nor the
man-servant had stirred. But from the other side of the staircase
alarmed voices were whispering; and when he came out he saw his
daughters' door open, and they both appeared in white dressing-gowns,
slipped on in haste.

"Father, what is it?"

Lucie, the elder, was already twenty-two, a tall dark girl, with a
haughty air; while Jeanne, the younger, as yet scarcely nineteen years
old, was small, with golden hair and a certain caressing grace.

"Nothing serious," he replied, to reassure them. "It seems that some
blusterers are making a disturbance down there. I am going to see."

But they exclaimed that they would not let him go before he had taken
something warm. If not, he would come back ill, with his stomach out of
order, as he always did. He struggled, gave his word of honour that he
was too much in a hurry.

"Listen!" said Jeanne, at last, hanging to his neck, "you must drink a
little glass of rum and eat two biscuits, or I shall remain like this,
and you'll have to take me with you."

He resigned himself, declaring that the biscuits would choke him. They
had already gone down before him, each with her candlestick. In the
dining-room below they hastened to serve him, one pouring out the rum,
the other running to the pantry for the biscuits. Having lost their
mother when very young, they had been rather badly brought up alone,
spoilt by their father, the elder haunted by the dream of singing
on the stage, the younger mad over painting in which she showed a
singular boldness of taste. But when they had to retrench after the
embarrassment in their affairs, these apparently extravagant girls
had suddenly developed into very sensible and shrewd managers, with
an eye for errors of centimes in accounts. Today, with their boyish
and artistic demeanour, they kept the purse, were careful over sous,
haggled with the tradesmen, renovated their dresses unceasingly, and in
fact, succeeded in rendering decent the growing embarrassment of the
house.

"Eat, papa," repeated Lucie.

Then, remarking his silent gloomy preoccupation, she was again
frightened.

"Is it serious, then, that you look at us like this? Tell us; we will
stay with you, and they can do without us at that lunch."

She was speaking of a party which had been planned for the morning,
Madame Hennebeau was to go in her carriage, first for Ccile, at
the Grgoires', then to call for them, so that they could all go to
Marchiennes to lunch at the Forges, where the manager's wife had
invited them. It was an opportunity to visit the workshops, the blast
furnaces, and the coke ovens.

"We will certainly remain," declared Jeanne, in her turn.

But he grew angry.

"A fine idea! I tell you that it is nothing. Just be so good as to get
back into your beds again, and dress yourselves for nine o'clock, as
was arranged."

He kissed them and hastened to leave. They heard the noise of his boots
vanishing over the frozen earth in the garden.

Jeanne carefully placed the stopper in the rum bottle, while Lucie
locked up the biscuits. The room had the cold neatness of dining-rooms
where the table is but meagrely supplied. And both of them took
advantage of this early descent to see if anything had been left
uncared for the evening before. A serviette lay about, the servant
should be scolded. At last they were upstairs again.

While he was taking the shortest cut through the narrow paths of his
kitchen garden, Deneulin was thinking of his compromised fortune,
this Montsou denier, this million which he had realized, dreaming to
multiply it tenfold, and which was to-day running such great risks.
It was an uninterrupted course of ill-luck, enormous and unforeseen
repairs, ruinous conditions of exploitation, then the disaster of this
industrial crisis, just when the profits were beginning to come in. If
the strike broke out here, he would be overthrown. He pushed a little
door: the buildings of the pit could be divined in the black night, by
the deepening of the shadow, starred by a few lanterns.

Jean-Bart was not so important as the Voreux, but its renewed
installation made it a pretty pit, as the engineers say. They had
not been contented by enlarging the shaft one metre and a half, and
deepening it to seven hundred and eight metres, they had equipped it
afresh with a new engine, new cages, entirely new material, all set up
according to the latest scientific improvements; and even a certain
seeking for elegance was visible in the constructions, a screening-shed
with carved frieze, a steeple adorned with a clock, a receiving-room
and an engine-room both rounded into an apse like a Renaissance
chapel, and surmounted by a chimney with a mosaic spiral made of black
bricks and red bricks. The pump was placed on the other shaft of the
concession, the old Gaston-Marie pit, reserved solely for this purpose.
Jean-Bart, to right and left of the winding-shaft, only had two
conduits, that for the steam ventilator and that for the ladders.

In the morning, ever since three o'clock, Chaval, who had arrived
first, had been seducing his comrades, convincing them that they ought
to imitate those at Montsou, and demand an increase of five centimes
a tram. Soon four hundred workmen had passed from the shed into the
receiving-room, in the midst of a tumult of gesticulation and shouting.
Those who wished to work stood with their lamps, barefooted, with
shovel or pick beneath their arms; while the others, still in their
sabots, with their overcoats on their shoulders because of the great
cold, were barring the shaft; and the captains were growing hoarse in
the effort to restore order, begging them to be reasonable and not to
prevent those who wanted from going down.

But Chaval was furious when he saw Catherine in her trousers and
jacket, her head tied up in the blue cap. On getting up, he had roughly
told her to stay in bed. In despair at this arrest of work she had
followed him all the same, for he never gave her any money; she often
had to pay both for herself and him; and what was to become of her if
she earned nothing? She was overcome by fear, the fear of a brothel
at Marchiennes, which was the end of putter-girls without bread and
without lodging.

"By God!" cried Chaval, "what the devil have you come here for?"

She stammered that she had no income to live on and that she wanted to
work.

"Then you put yourself against me, wench? Back you go at once, or I'll
go back with you and kick my sabots into your backside."

She recoiled timidly but she did not leave, resolved to see how things
would turn out. Deneulin had arrived by the screening-stairs. In
spite of the weak light of the lanterns, with a quick look he took in
the scene, with this rabble wrapt in shadow; he knew every face--the
pikemen, the porters, the landers, the putters, even the trammers. In
the nave, still new and clean, the arrested task was waiting; the steam
in the engine, under pressure, made slight whistling sounds; the cages
were hanging motionless to the cables; the trams, abandoned on the
way, were encumbering the metal floors. Scarcely eighty lamps had been
taken; the others were flaming in the lamp cabin. But no doubt a word
from him would suffice, and the whole life of labour would begin again.

"Well, what's going on then, my lads?" he asked in a loud voice. "What
are you angry about? Just explain to me and we will see if we can
agree."

He usually behaved in a paternal way towards his men, while at the
same time demanding hard work. With an authoritative, rough manner, he
had tried to conquer them by a good nature which had its outbursts of
passion, and he often gained their love; the men especially respected
in him his courage, always in the cuttings with them, the first in
danger whenever an accident terrified the pit. Twice, after fire-damp
explosions, he had been let down, fastened by a rope under his armpits,
when the bravest drew back.

"Now," he began again, "you are not going to make me repent of having
trusted you. You know that I have refused police protection. Talk
quietly and I will hear you."

All were now silent and awkward, moving away from him; and it was
Chaval who at last said:

"Well, Monsieur Deneulin, we can't go on working; we must have five
centimes more the tram."

He seemed surprised.

"What! five centimes! and why this demand? I don't complain about your
timbering, I don't want to impose a new tariff on you like the Montsou
directors."

"Maybe! but the Montsou mates are right, all the same. They won't have
the tariff, and they want a rise of five centimes because it is not
possible to work properly at the present rates. We want five centimes
more, don't we, you others?"

Voices approved, and the noise began again in the midst of violent
gesticulation. Gradually they drew near, forming a small circle.

A flame came into Deneulin's eyes, and his fist, that of a man who
liked strong government, was clenched, for fear of yielding to the
temptation of seizing one of them by the neck. He preferred to discuss
on the basis of reason.

"You want five centimes, and I agree that the work is worth it. Only
I can't give it. If I gave it I should simply be done for. You must
understand that I have to live first in order for you to live, and
I've got to the end, the least rise in net prices will upset me. Two
years ago, you remember, at the time of the last strike, I yielded, I
was able to then. But that rise of wages was not the less ruinous, for
these two years have been a struggle. To-day I would rather let the
whole thing go than not be able to tell next month where to get the
money to pay you."

Chaval laughed roughly in the face of this master who told them his
affairs so frankly. The others lowered their faces, obstinate and
incredulous, refusing to take into their heads the idea that a master
did not gain millions out of his men.

Then Deneulin, persisting, explained his struggle with Montsou, always
on the watch and ready to devour him if, some day, he had the stupidity
to come to grief. It was a savage competition which forced him to
economize, the more so since the great depth of Jean-Bart increased the
price of extraction, an unfavourable condition hardly compensated by
the great thickness of the coal-beds. He would never have raised wages
after the last strike if it had not been necessary for him to imitate
Montsou, for fear of seeing his men leave him. And he threatened them
with the morrow; a fine result it would be for them, if they obliged
him to sell, to pass beneath the terrible yoke of the directors! He did
not sit on a throne far away in an unknown sanctuary; he was not one
of those shareholders who pay agents to skin the miner who has never
seen them; he was a master, he risked something besides his money, he
risked his intelligence, his health, his life. Stoppage of work would
simply mean death, for he had no stock, and he must fulfil orders.
Besides, his standing capital could not sleep. How could he keep his
engagements? Who would pay the interest on the sums his friends had
confided to him? It would mean bankruptcy.

"That's where we are, my good fellows," he said, in conclusion. "I want
to convince you. We don't ask a man to cut his own throat, do we? and
if I give you your five centimes, or if I let you go out on strike,
it's the same as if I cut my throat."

He was silent. Grunts went round. A party among the miners seemed to
hesitate. Several went back towards the shaft.

"At least," said a captain, "let every one be free. Who are those who
want to work?"

Catherine had advanced among the first. But Chaval fiercely pushed her
back, shouting:

"We are all agreed; it's only bloody rogues who'll leave their mates!"

After that, conciliation appeared impossible. The cries began again,
and men were hustled away from the shaft, at the risk of being crushed
against the walls. For a moment the manager, in despair, tried to
struggle alone, to reduce the crowd by violence; but it was useless
madness, and he retired. For a few minutes he rested, out of breath, on
a chair in the receiver's office, so overcome by his powerlessness that
no ideas came to him. At last he grew calm, and told an inspector to go
and bring Chaval; then, when the latter had agreed to the interview, he
motioned the others away.

"Leave us."

Deneulin's idea was to see what this fellow was after. At the first
words he felt that he was vain, and was devoured by passionate
jealousy. Then he attacked him by flattery, affecting surprise that
a workman of his merit should so compromise his future. It seemed as
though he had long had his eyes on him for rapid advancement; and
he ended by squarely offering to make him captain later on. Chaval
listened in silence, with his fists at first clenched, but then
gradually unbent. Something was working in the depths of his skull;
if he persisted in the strike he would be nothing more than tienne's
lieutenant, while now another ambition opened, that of passing into the
ranks of the bosses. The heat of pride rose to his face and intoxicated
him. Besides, the band of strikers whom he had expected since the
morning had not arrived; some obstacle must have stopped them, perhaps
the police; it was time to submit. But all the same he shook his head;
he acted the incorruptible man, striking his breast indignantly. Then,
without mentioning to the master the rendezvous he had given to the
Montsou men, he promised to calm his mates, and to persuade them to go
down.

Deneulin remained hidden, and the captains themselves stood aside. For
an hour they heard Chaval orating and discussing, standing on a tram in
the receiving-room. Some of the men hooted him; a hundred and twenty
went off exasperated, persisting in the resolution which he had made
them take. It was already past seven. The sun was rising brilliantly;
it was a bright day of hard frost; and all at once movement began in
the pit, and the arrested labour went on. First the crank of the engine
plunged, rolling and unrolling the cables on the drums. Then, in the
midst of the tumult of the signals, the descent took place. The cages
filled and were engulfed, and rose again, the shaft swallowing its
ration of trammers and putters and pikemen; while on the metal floors
the landers pushed the trams with a sound of thunder.

"By God! What the devil are you doing there?" cried Chaval to
Catherine, who was awaiting her turn. "Will you just go down and not
laze about!"

At nine o'clock, when Madame Hennebeau arrived in her carriage with
Ccile, she found Lucie and Jeanne quite ready and very elegant, in
spite of their dresses having been renovated for the twentieth time.
But Deneulin was surprised to see Ngrel accompanying the carriage on
horseback. What! were the men also in the party? Then Madame Hennebeau
explained in her maternal way that they had frightened her by saying
that the streets were full of evil faces, and so she preferred to
bring a defender. Ngrel laughed and reassured them: nothing to cause
anxiety, threats of brawlers as usual, but not one of them would dare
to throw a stone at a window-pane. Still pleased with his success,
Deneulin related the checked rebellion at Jean-Bart. He said that he
was now quite at rest. And on the Vandame road, while the young ladies
got into the carriage, all congratulated themselves on the superb day,
oblivious of the long swelling shudder of the marching people afar off
in the country, though they might have heard the sound of it if they
had pressed their ears against the earth.

"Well! it is agreed," repeated Madame Hennebeau. "This evening you will
call for the young ladies and dine with us. Madame Grgoire has also
promised to come for Ccile."

"You may reckon on me," replied Deneulin.

The carriage went off towards Vandame, Jeanne and Lucie leaning down
to laugh once more to their father, who was standing by the roadside;
while Ngrel gallantly trotted behind the fleeing wheels.

They crossed the forest, taking the road from Vandame to Marchiennes.
As they approached Tartaret, Jeanne asked Madame Hennebeau if she knew
Cte-Verte, and the latter, in spite of her stay of five years in
the country, acknowledged that she had never been on that side. Then
they made a detour. Tartaret, on the outskirts of the forest, was an
uncultivated moor, of volcanic sterility, under which for ages a coal
mine had been burning. Its history was lost in legend. The miners of
the place said that fire from heaven had fallen on this Sodom in the
bowels of the earth, where the putter-girls had committed abominations
together, so that they had not even had the time to come to the
surface, and today were still burning at the bottom of this hell. The
calcined rocks, of a sombre red, were covered by an efflorescence of
alum as by a leprosy. Sulphur grew like a yellow flower at the edge
of the fissures. At night, those who were brave enough to venture to
look into these holes declared that they saw flames there, sinful
souls shrivelling in the furnace within. Wandering lights moved over
the soil, and hot vapours, the poisons from the devil's ordure and his
dirty kitchen, were constantly smoking. And like a miracle of eternal
spring, in the midst of this accursed moor of Tartaret, Cte-Verte
appeared, with its meadows for ever green, its beeches with leaves
unceasingly renewed, its fields where three harvests ripened. It was
a natural hot-house, warmed by the fire in the deep strata beneath.
The snow never lay on it. The enormous bouquet of verdure, beside the
leafless forest trees, blossomed on this December day, and the frost
had not even scorched the edge of it.

Soon the carriage was passing over the plain. Ngrel joked over the
legend, and explained that a fire often occurred at the bottom of a
mine from the fermentation of the coal dust; if not mastered it would
burn on for ever, and he mentioned a Belgian pit which had been flooded
by diverting a river and running it into the pit. But he became silent.
For the last few minutes groups of miners had been constantly passing
the carriage; they went by in silence, with sidelong looks at the
luxurious equipage which forced them to stand aside. Their number went
on increasing. The horses were obliged to cross the little bridge over
the Scarpe at walking pace. What was going on, then, to bring all these
people into the roads? The young ladies became frightened, and Ngrel
began to smell out some fray in the excited country; it was a relief
when they at last arrived at Marchiennes. The batteries of coke ovens
and the chimneys of the blast furnaces, beneath a sun which seemed to
extinguish them, were belching out smoke and raining their everlasting
soot through the air.




CHAPTER II


At Jean-Bart, Catherine had already been at work for an hour, pushing
trams as far as the relays; and she was soaked in such a bath of
perspiration that she stopped a moment to wipe her face.

At the bottom of the cutting, where he was hammering at the seam with
his mates, Chaval was astonished when he no longer heard the rumble of
the wheels. The lamps burnt badly, and the coal dust made it impossible
to see.

"What's up?" he shouted.

When she answered that she was sure she would melt, and that her heart
was going to stop, he replied furiously:

"Do like us, stupid! Take off your shift."

They were seven hundred and eight metres to the north in the first
passage of the Dsire seam, which was at a distance of three
kilometres from the pit-eye. When they spoke of this part of the pit,
the miners of the region grew pale, and lowered their voices, as if
they had spoken of hell; and most often they were content to shake
their heads as men who would rather not speak of these depths of fiery
furnace. As the galleries sank towards the north, they approached
Tartaret, penetrating to that interior fire which calcined the rocks
above. The cuttings at the point at which they had arrived had an
average temperature of forty-five degrees. They were there in the
accursed city, in the midst of the flames which the passers-by on
the plain could see through the fissures, spitting out sulphur and
poisonous vapours.

Catherine, who had already taken off her jacket, hesitated, then took
off her trousers also; and with naked arms and naked thighs, her
chemise tied round her hips by a cord like a blouse, she began to push
again.

"Anyhow, that's better," she said aloud.

In the stifling heat she still felt a vague fear. Ever since they began
working here, five days ago, she had thought of the stories told her in
childhood, of those putter-girls of the days of old who were burning
beneath Tartaret, as a punishment for things which no one dared to
repeat. No doubt she was too big now to believe such silly stories; but
still, what would she do if she were suddenly to see coming out of the
wall a girl as red as a stove, with eyes like live coals? The idea made
her perspire still more.

At the relay, eighty metres from the cutting, another putter took the
tram and pushed it eighty metres farther to the upbrow, so that the
receiver could forward it with the others which came down from the
upper galleries.

"Gracious! you're making yourself comfortable!" said this woman, a lean
widow of thirty, when she saw Catherine in her chemise. "I can't do it,
the trammers at the brow bother me with their dirty tricks."

"Ah, well!" replied the young girl. "I don't care about the men! I feel
too bad."

She went off again, pushing an empty tram. The worst was that in this
bottom passage another cause joined with the neighbourhood of Tartaret
to make the heat unbearable. They were by the side of old workings, a
very deep abandoned gallery of Gaston-Marie, where, ten years earlier,
an explosion of fire-damp had set the seam alight; and it was still
burning behind the clay wall which had been built there and was kept
constantly repaired, in order to limit the disaster. Deprived of air,
the fire ought to have become extinct, but no doubt unknown currents
kept it alive; it had gone on for ten years, and heated the clay wall
like the bricks of an oven, so that those who passed felt half-roasted.
It was along this wall, for a length of more than a hundred metres,
that the haulage was carried on, in a temperature of sixty degrees.

After two journeys, Catherine again felt stifled. Fortunately, the
passage was large and convenient in this Dsire seam, one of the
thickest in the district. The bed was one metre ninety in height, and
the men could work standing. But they would rather have worked with
twisted necks and a little fresh air.

"Hallo, there! are you asleep?" said Chaval again, roughly, as soon as
he no longer heard Catherine moving. "How the devil did I come to get
such a jade? Will you just fill your tram and push?"

She was at the bottom of the cutting, leaning on her shovel; she was
feeling ill, and she looked at them all with a foolish air without
obeying. She scarcely saw them by the reddish gleam of the lamps,
entirely naked like animals, so black, so encrusted in sweat and coal,
that their nakedness did not frighten her. It was a confused task,
the bending of ape-like backs, an infernal vision of scorched limbs,
spending their strength amid dull blows and groans. But they could see
her better, no doubt, for the picks left off hammering, and they joked
her about taking off her trousers.

"Eh! you'll catch cold; look out!"

"It's because she's got such fine legs! I say, Chaval, there's enough
there for two."

"Oh! we must see. Lift up! Higher! higher!"

Then Chaval, without growing angry at these jokes, turned on her.

"That's it, by God! Ah! she likes dirty jokes. She'd stay there to
listen till to-morrow."

Catherine had painfully decided to fill her tram, then she pushed it.
The gallery was too wide for her to get a purchase on the timber on
both sides; her naked feet were twisted in the rails where they sought
a point of support, while she slowly moved on, her arms stiffened in
front, and her back breaking. As soon as she came up to the clay wall,
the fiery torture again began, and the sweat fell from her whole body
in enormous drops as from a storm-cloud. She had scarcely got a third
of the way before she streamed, blinded, soiled also by the black mud.
Her narrow chemise, as though dipped in ink, was sticking to her skin,
and rising up to her waist with the movement of her thighs; it hurt her
so that she had once more to stop her task.

What was the matter with her, then, today? Never before had she felt
as if there were wool in her bones. It must be the bad air. The
ventilation did not reach to the bottom of this distant passage. One
breathed there all sorts of vapours, which came out of the coal with
the low bubbling sound of a spring, so abundantly sometimes that
the lamps would not burn; to say nothing of fire-damp, which nobody
noticed, for from one week's end to the other the men were always
breathing it into their noses throughout the seam. She knew that bad
air well; dead air the miners called it; the heavy asphyxiating gases
below, above them the light gases which catch fire and blow up all the
stalls of a pit, with hundreds of men, in a single burst of thunder.
From her childhood she had swallowed so much that she was surprised she
bore it so badly, with buzzing ears and burning throat.

Unable to go farther, she felt the need of taking off her chemise. It
was beginning to torture her, this garment of which the least folds cut
and burnt her. She resisted the longing, and tried to push again, but
was forced to stand upright. Then quickly, saying to herself that she
would cover herself at the relay, she took off everything, the cord and
the chemise, so feverishly that she would have torn off her skin if she
could. And now, naked and pitiful, brought down to the level of the
female animal seeking its living in the mire of the streets, covered
with soot and mud up to the belly, she laboured on like a cab-hack. On
all fours she pushed onwards.

But despair came; it gave her no relief to be naked. What more could
she take off? The buzzing in her ears deafened her, she seemed to feel
a vice gripping her temples. She fell on her knees. The lamp, wedged
into the coal in the tram, seemed to her to be going out. The intention
to turn up the wick alone survived in the midst of her confused ideas.
Twice she tried to examine it, and both times when she placed it before
her on the earth she saw it turn pale, as though it also lacked breath.
Suddenly the lamp went out. Then everything whirled around her in the
darkness; a millstone turned in her head, her heart grew weak and left
off beating, numbed in its turn by the immense weariness which was
putting her limbs to sleep. She had fallen back in anguish amid the
asphyxiating air close to the ground.

"By God! I believe she's lazing again," growled Chaval's voice.

He listened from the top of the cutting, and could hear no sound of
wheels.

"Eh, Catherine! you damned worm!"

His voice was lost afar in the black gallery, and not a breath replied.

"I'll come and make you move, I will!"

Nothing stirred, there was only the same silence, as of death. He
came down furiously, rushing along with his lamp so violently that he
nearly fell over the putter's body which barred the way. He looked
at her in stupefaction. What was the matter, then? was it humbug, a
pretence of going to sleep? But the lamp which he had lowered to light
up her face threatened to go out. He lifted it and lowered it afresh,
and at last understood; it must be a gust of bad air. His violence
disappeared; the devotion of the miner in face of a comrade's peril
was awaking within him. He shouted for her chemise to be brought, and
seized the naked and unconscious girl in his arms, holding her as high
as possible. When their garments had been thrown over her shoulders he
set out running, supporting his burden with one hand, and carrying the
two lamps with the other. The deep galleries unrolled before him as he
rushed along, turning to the right, then to the left, seeking life in
the frozen air of the plain which blew down the air-shaft. At last the
sound of a spring stopped him, the trickle of water flowing from the
rock. He was at a square in the great haulage gallery which formerly
led to Gaston-Marie. The air here blew in like a tempest, and was so
fresh that a shudder went through him as he seated himself on the earth
against the props; his mistress was still unconscious, with closed eyes.

"Catherine, come now, by God! no humbug. Hold yourself up a bit while I
dip this in the water."

He was frightened to find her so limp. However, he was able to dip her
chemise in the spring, and to bathe her face with it. She was like a
corpse, already buried in the depth of the earth, with her slender
girlish body which seemed to be still hesitating before swelling to
the form of puberty. Then a shudder ran over her childish breast, over
the belly and thighs of the poor little creature deflowered before her
time. She opened her eyes and stammered:

"I'm cold."

"Ah! that's better now!" cried Chaval, relieved.

He dressed her, slipped on the chemise easily, but swore over the
difficulty he had in getting on the trousers, for she could not help
much. She remained dazed, not understanding where she was, nor why
she was naked. When she remembered she was ashamed. How had she dared
to take everything off! And she questioned him; had she been seen so,
without even a handkerchief around her waist to cover her? He joked,
and made up stories, saying that he had just brought her there in the
midst of all the mates standing in a row. What an idea, to have taken
his advice and exhibited her bum! Afterwards he declared that the mates
could not even know whether it was round or square, he had rushed along
so swiftly.

"The deuce! but I'm dying of cold," he said, dressing himself in turn.

Never had she seen him so kind. Usually, for one good word that he said
to her she received at once two bullying ones. It would have been so
pleasant to live in agreement; a feeling of tenderness went through her
in the languor of her fatigue. She smiled at him, and murmured:

"Kiss me."

He embraced her, and lay down beside her, waiting till she was able to
walk.

"You know," she said again, "you were wrong to shout at me over there,
for I couldn't do more, really! Even in the cutting you're not so hot;
if you only knew how it roasts you at the bottom of the passage!"

"Sure enough," he replied, "it would be better under the trees. You
feel bad in that stall, I'm afraid, my poor girl."

She was so touched at hearing him agree with her that she tried to be
brave.

"Oh! it's a bad place. Then, to-day the air is poisoned. But you shall
see soon if I'm a worm. When one has to work, one works; isn't it true?
I'd die rather than stop."

There was silence. He held her with one arm round her waist, pressing
her against his breast to keep her from harm. Although she already felt
strong enough to go back to the stall, she forgot everything in her
delight.

"Only," she went on in a very low voice, "I should like it so much if
you were kinder. Yes, it is so good when we love each other a little."

And she began to cry softly.

"But I do love you," he cried, "for I've taken you with me."

She only replied by shaking her head. There are often men who take
women just in order to have them, caring mighty little about their
happiness. Her tears flowed more hotly; it made her despair now to
think of the happy life she would have led if she had chanced to fall
to another lad, whose arm she would always have felt thus round her
waist. Another? and the vague image of that other arose from the depth
of her emotion. But it was done with; she only desired now to live to
the end with this one, if he would not hustle her about too much.

"Then," she said, "try to be like this sometimes."

Sobs cut short her words, and he embraced her again.

"You're a stupid! There, I swear to be kind. I'm not worse than any one
else, go on!"

She looked at him, and began to smile through her tears. Perhaps he
was right; one never met women who were happy. Then, although she
distrusted his oath, she gave herself up to the joy of seeing him
affectionate. Good God! if only that could last! They had both embraced
again, and as they were pressing each other in a long clasp they heard
steps, which made them get up. Three mates who had seen them pass had
come up to know how she was.

They set out together. It was nearly ten o'clock, and they took their
lunch into a cool corner before going back to sweat at the bottom of
the cutting. They were finishing the double slice of bread-and-butter,
their brick, and were about to drink the coffee from their tin, when
they were disturbed by a noise coming from stalls in the distance. What
then? was it another accident? They got up and ran. Pikemen, putters,
trammers crossed them at every step; no one knew anything; all were
shouting; it must be some great misfortune. Gradually the whole mine
was in terror, frightened shadows emerged from the galleries, lanterns
danced and flew away in the darkness. Where was it? Why could no one
say?

All at once a captain passed, shouting:

"They are cutting the cables! they are cutting the cables!"

Then the panic increased. It was a furious gallop through the gloomy
passages. Their heads were confused. Why cut the cables? And who was
cutting them, when the men were below? It seemed monstrous.

But the voice of another captain was heard and then lost:

"The Montsou men are cutting the cables! Let every one go up!"

When he had understood, Chaval stopped Catherine short. The idea that
he would meet the Montsou men up above, should he get out, paralysed
his legs. It had come, then, that band which he thought had got into
the hands of the police. For a moment he thought of retracing his path
and ascending through Gaston-Marie, but that was no longer possible. He
swore, hesitating, hiding his fear, repeating that it was stupid to run
like that. They would not, surely, leave them at the bottom.

The captain's voice echoed anew, now approaching them:

"Let every one go up! To the ladders! to the ladders!"

And Chaval was carried away with his mates. He pushed Catherine and
accused her of not running fast enough. Did she want, then, to remain
in the pit to die of hunger? For those Montsou brigands were capable
of breaking the ladders without waiting for people to come up. This
abominable suggestion ended by driving them wild. Along the galleries
there was only a furious rush, helter-skelter; a race of madmen, each
striving to arrive first and mount before the others. Some men shouted
that the ladders were broken and that no one could get out. And then in
frightened groups they began to reach the pit-eye, where they were all
engulfed. They threw themselves toward the shaft, they crushed through
the narrow door to the ladder passage; while an old groom who had
prudently led back the horses to the stable, looked at them with an air
of contemptuous indifference, accustomed to spend nights in the pit and
certain that he could eventually be drawn out of it.

"By God! will you climb up in front of me?" said Chaval to Catherine.
"At least I can hold you if you fall."

Out of breath, and suffocated by this race of three kilometres which
had once more bathed her in sweat, she gave herself up, without
understanding, to the eddies of the crowd. Then he pulled her by the
arm, almost breaking it; and she cried with pain, her tears bursting
out. Already he was forgetting his oath, never would she be happy.

"Go on, then!" he roared.

But he frightened her too much. If she went first he would bully her
the whole time. So she resisted, while the wild flood of their comrades
pushed them to one side. The water that filtered from the shaft was
falling in great drops, and the floor of the pit-eye, shaken by this
tramping, was trembling over the sump, the muddy cesspool ten metres
deep. At Jean-Bart, two years earlier, a terrible accident had happened
just here; the breaking of a cable had precipitated the cage to the
bottom of the sump, in which two men had been drowned. And they all
thought of this; every one would be left down there if they all crowded
on to the planks.

"Confounded dunderhead!" shouted Chaval. "Die then; I shall be rid of
you!"

He climbed up and she followed.

From the bottom to daylight there were a hundred and two ladders, about
seven metres in length, each placed on a narrow landing which occupied
the breadth of the passage and in which a square hole scarcely allowed
the shoulders to pass. It was like a flat chimney, seven hundred metres
in height, between the wall of the shaft and the brattice of the
winding-cage, a damp pipe, black and endless, in which the ladders were
placed one above the other, almost straight, in regular stages. It took
a strong man twenty-five minutes to climb up this giant column. The
passage, however, was no longer used except in cases of accident.

Catherine at first climbed bravely. Her naked feet were used to the
hard coal on the floors of the passages, and did not suffer from the
square rungs, covered with iron rods to prevent them from wearing
away. Her hands, hardened by the haulage, grasped without fatigue the
uprights that were too big for her. And it even interested her and took
her out of her grief, this unforeseen ascent, this long serpent of
men flowing on and hoisting themselves up three on a ladder, so that
even when the head should emerge in daylight the tail would still be
trailing over the sump. They were not there yet, the first could hardly
have ascended a third of the shaft. No one spoke now, only their feet
moved with a low sound; while the lamps, like travelling stars, spaced
out from below upward, formed a continually increasing line.

Catherine heard a trammer behind her counting the ladders. It gave her
the idea of counting them also. They had already mounted fifteen, and
were arriving at a landing-place. But at that moment she collided with
Chaval's legs. He swore, shouting to her to look out. Gradually the
whole column stopped and became motionless. What then? had something
happened? and every one recovered his voice to ask questions and to
express fear. Their anxiety had increased since leaving the bottom;
their ignorance as to what was going on above oppressed them more as
they approached daylight. Someone announced that they would have to go
down again, that the ladders were broken. That was the thought that
preoccupied them all, the fear of finding themselves face to face with
space. Another explanation came down from mouth to mouth; there had
been an accident, a pikeman slipped from a rung. No one knew exactly,
the shouts made it impossible to hear; were they going to bed there? At
last, without any precise information being obtained, the ascent began
again, with the same slow, painful movement, in the midst of the tread
of feet and the dancing of lamps. It must certainly be higher up that
the ladders were broken.

At the thirty-second ladder, as they passed a third landing-stage,
Catherine felt her legs and arms grow stiff. At first she had felt a
slight tingling in her skin. Now she lost the sensation of the iron
and the wood beneath her feet and in her hands. A vague pain, which
gradually became burning, heated her muscles. And in the dizziness
which came over her, she recalled her grandfather Bonnemort's stories
of the days when there was no passage, and little girls of ten used to
take out the coal on their shoulders up bare ladders; so that if one
of them slipped, or a fragment of coal simply rolled out of a basket,
three or four children would fall down head first from the blow. The
cramp in her limbs became unbearable, she would never reach the end.

Fresh stoppages allowed her to breathe. But the terror which was
communicated every time from above dazed her still more. Above and
below her, respiration became more difficult. This interminable ascent
was causing giddiness, and the nausea affected her with the others. She
was suffocating, intoxicated with the darkness, exasperated with the
walls which crushed against her flesh, and shuddering also with the
dampness, her body perspiring beneath the great drops which fell on
her. They were approaching a level where so thick a rain fell that it
threatened to extinguish their lamps.

Chaval twice spoke to Catherine without obtaining any reply. What the
devil was she doing down there? Had she let her tongue fall? She might
just tell him if she was all right. They had been climbing for half an
hour, but so heavily that he had only reached the fifty-ninth ladder;
there were still forty-three. Catherine at last stammered that she was
getting on all right. He would have treated her as a worm if she had
acknowledged her weariness. The iron of the rungs must have cut her
feet; it seemed to her that it was sawing in up to the bone. After
every grip she expected to see her hands leave the uprights; they were
so peeled and stiff she could not close her fingers, and she feared she
would fall backward with torn shoulders and dislocated thighs in this
continual effort. It was especially the defective slope of the ladders
from which she suffered, the almost perpendicular position which
obliged her to hoist herself up by the strength of her wrists, with her
belly against the wood. The panting of many breaths now drowned the
sound of the feet, forming an enormous moan, multiplied tenfold by the
partition of the passage, arising from the depths and expiring towards
the light. There was a groan; word ran along that a trammer had just
cut his head open against the edge of a stair.

And Catherine went on climbing. They had passed the level. The rain
had ceased; a mist made heavy the cellar-like air, poisoned with the
odour of old iron and damp wood. Mechanically she continued to count
in a low voice--eighty-one, eighty-two, eighty-three; still nineteen.
The repetition of these figures supported her merely by their rhythmic
balance; she had no further consciousness of her movements. When she
lifted her eyes the lamps turned in a spiral. Her blood was flowing;
she felt that she was dying; the least breath would have knocked her
over. The worst was that those below were now pushing, and that the
entire column was stampeding, yielding to the growing anger of its
fatigue, the furious need to see the sun again. The first mates had
emerged; there were, then, no broken ladders; but the idea that they
might yet be broken to prevent the last from coming up, when others
were already breathing up above, nearly drove them mad. And when a new
stoppage occurred oaths broke out, and all went on climbing, hustling
each other, passing over each other's bodies to arrive at all costs.

Then Catherine fell. She had cried Chaval's name in despairing appeal.
He did not hear; he was struggling, digging his heels into a comrade's
ribs to get before him. And she was rolled down and trampled over.
As she fainted she dreamed. It seemed to her that she was one of
the little putter-girls of old days, and that a fragment of coal,
fallen from the basket above her, had thrown her to the bottom of the
shaft, like a sparrow struck by a flint. Five ladders only remained
to climb. It had taken nearly an hour. She never knew how she reached
daylight, carried up on people's shoulders, supported by the throttling
narrowness of the passage. Suddenly she found herself in the dazzling
sunlight, in the midst of a yelling crowd who were hooting her.




CHAPTER III


From early morning, before daylight, a tremor had agitated the
settlements, and that tremor was now swelling through the roads and
over the whole country. But the departure had not taken place as
arranged, for the news had spread that cavalry and police were scouring
the plain. It was said that they had arrived from Douai during the
night, and Rasseneur was accused of having betrayed his mates by
warning M. Hennebeau; a putter even swore that she had seen the servant
taking a dispatch to the telegraph office. The miners clenched their
fists and watched the soldiers from behind their shutters by the pale
light of the early morning.

Towards half-past seven, as the sun was rising, another rumour
circulated, reassuring the impatient. It was a false alarm, a simple
military promenade, such as the general occasionally ordered since
the strike had broken out, at the desire of the prefect of Lille. The
strikers detested this official; they reproached him with deceiving
them by the promise of a conciliatory intervention, which was limited
to a march of troops into Montsou every week, to overawe them. So when
the cavalry and police quietly took the road back to Marchiennes, after
contenting themselves with deafening the settlements by the stamping of
their horses over the hard earth, the miners jeered at this innocent
prefect and his soldiers who turned on their heels when things were
beginning to get hot. Up till nine o'clock they stood peacefully about,
in good humour, before their houses, following with their eyes up the
streets the meek backs of the last gendarmes. In the depths of their
large beds the good people of Montsou were still sleeping, with their
heads among the feathers. At the manager's house, Madame Hennebeau had
just been seen setting out in the carriage, leaving M. Hennebeau at
work, no doubt, for the closed and silent villa seemed dead. Not one
of the pits had any military guard; it was a fatal lack of foresight
in the hour of danger, the natural stupidity which accompanies
catastrophes, the fault which a government commits whenever there is
need of precise knowledge of the facts. And nine o'clock was striking
when the colliers at last took the Vandame road, to repair to the
rendezvous decided on the day before in the forest.

tienne had very quickly perceived that he would certainly not find
over at Jean-Bart the three thousand comrades on whom he was counting.
Many believed that the demonstration was put off, and the worst was
that two or three bands, already on the way, would compromise the cause
if he did not at all costs put himself at their head. Almost a hundred,
who had set out before daylight, were taking refuge beneath the forest
beeches, waiting for the others. Souvarine, whom the young man went
up to consult, shrugged his shoulders; ten resolute fellows could do
more work than a crowd; and he turned back to the open book before
him, refusing to join in. The thing threatened to turn into sentiment
when it would have been enough to adopt the simple method of burning
Montsou. As tienne left the house he saw Rasseneur, seated before the
metal stove and looking very pale, while his wife, in her everlasting
black dress, was abusing him in polite and cutting terms.

Maheu was of opinion that they ought to keep their promise. A
rendezvous like this was sacred. However, the night had calmed their
fever; he was now fearing misfortune, and he explained that it was
their duty to go over there to maintain their mates in the right path.
Maheude approved with a nod. tienne repeated complacently that it
was necessary to adopt revolutionary methods, without attempting any
person's life. Before setting out he refused his share of a loaf that
had been given him the evening before, together with a bottle of gin;
but he drank three little glasses, one after the other, saying that
he wanted to keep out the cold; he even carried away a tinful. Alzire
would look after the children. Old Bonnemort, whose legs were suffering
from yesterday's walk, remained in bed.

They did not go away together, from motives of prudence. Jeanlin had
disappeared long ago. Maheu and Maheude went off on the side sloping
towards Montsou; while tienne turned towards the forest, where he
proposed to join his mates. On the way he caught up a band of women
among whom he recognized Mother Brul and the Levaque woman; as they
walked they were eating chestnuts which Mouquette had brought; they
swallowed the skins so as to feel more in their stomachs. But in the
forest he found no one; the men were already at Jean-Bart. He took the
same course, and arrived at the pit at the moment when Levaque and
some hundreds others were penetrating into the square. Miners were
coming up from every direction--the men by the main road, the women by
the fields, all at random, without leaders, without weapons, flowing
naturally thither like water which runs down a slope. tienne perceived
Jeanlin, who had climbed up on a foot-bridge, installed as though at
a theatre. He ran faster, and entered among the first. There were
scarcely three hundred of them.

There was some hesitation when Deneulin showed himself at the top of
the staircase which led to the receiving-room.

"What do you want?" he asked in a loud voice.

After having watched the disappearance of the carriage, from which
his daughters were still laughing towards him, he had returned to the
pit overtaken by a strange anxiety. Everything, however, was found in
good order. The men had gone down; the cage was working, and he became
reassured again, and was talking to the head captain when the approach
of the strikers was announced to him. He had placed himself at a window
of the screening-shed; and in the face of this increasing flood which
filled the square, he at once felt his impotence. How could he defend
these buildings, open on every side? he could scarcely group some
twenty of his workmen round himself. He was lost.

"What do you want?" he repeated, pale with repressed anger, making an
effort to accept his disaster courageously.

There were pushes and growls amid the crowd. tienne at last came
forward, saying:

"We do not come to injure you, sir, but work must cease everywhere."

Deneulin frankly treated him as an idiot.

"Do you think you will benefit me if you stop work at my place? You
might just as well fire a gun off into my back. Yes, my men are below,
and they shall not come up, unless you mean to murder me first!"

These rough words raised a clamour. Maheu had to hold back Levaque,
who was pushing forward in a threatening manner, while tienne went on
discussing, and tried to convince Deneulin of the lawfulness of their
revolutionary conduct. But the latter replied by the right to work.
Besides, he refused to discuss such folly; he meant to be master in his
own place. His only regret was that he had not four gendarmes here to
sweep away this mob.

"To be sure, it is my fault; I deserve what has happened to me. With
fellows of your sort force is the only argument. The Government thinks
to buy you by concessions. You will throw it down, that's all, when it
has given you weapons."

tienne was quivering, but still held himself in. He lowered his voice.

"I beg you, sir, give the order for your men to come up. I cannot
answer for my mates. You may avoid a disaster."

"No! be good enough to let me alone! Do I know you? You do not belong
to my works, you have no quarrel with me. It is only brigands who thus
scour the country to pillage houses."

Loud vociferations now drowned his voice, the women especially abused
him. But he continued to hold his own, experiencing a certain relief in
this frankness with which he expressed his disciplinarian nature. Since
he was ruined in any case, he thought platitudes a useless cowardice.
But their numbers went on increasing; nearly five hundred were pushing
towards the door, and he might have been torn to pieces if his head
captain had not pulled him violently back.

"For mercy's sake, sir! There will be a massacre. What is the good of
letting men be killed for nothing?"

He struggled and protested in one last cry thrown at the crowd:

"You set of brigands, you will know what, when we are strongest again!"

They led him away; the hustling of the crowd had thrown the first ranks
against the staircase so that the rail was twisted. It was the women
who pushed and screamed and urged on the men. The door yielded at
once; it was a door without a lock, simply closed by a latch. But the
staircase was too narrow for the pushing crowd, which would have taken
long to get in if the rear of the besiegers had not gone off to enter
by other openings. Then they poured in on all sides--by the shed, the
screening-place, the boiler buildings. In less than five minutes the
whole pit belonged to them; they swarmed at every story in the midst
of furious gestures and cries, carried away by their victory over this
master who resisted.

Maheu, in terror, had rushed forward among the first, saying to tienne:

"They must not kill him!"

The latter was already running; then, when tienne understood that
Deneulin had barricaded himself in the captains' room, he replied:

"Well, would it be our fault? such a madman!"

He was feeling anxious, however, being still too calm to yield to this
outburst of anger. His pride of leadership also suffered on seeing the
band escape from his authority and become enraged, going beyond the
cold execution of the will of the people, such as he had anticipated.
In vain he called for coolness, shouting that they must not put right
on their enemies' side by acts of useless destruction.

"To the boilers!" shouted Mother Brul. "Put out the fires!"

Levaque, who had found a file, was brandishing it like a dagger,
dominating the tumult with a terrible cry:

"Cut the cables! cut the cables!"

Soon they all repeated this; only tienne and Maheu continued to
protest, dazed, and talking in the tumult without obtaining silence. At
last the former was able to say:

"But there are men below, mates!"

The noise redoubled and voices arose from all sides:

"So much the worse!--Ought not to go down!--Serve the traitors
right!--Yes, yes, let them stay there!--And then, they have the
ladders!"

Then, when this idea of the ladders had made them still more obstinate,
tienne saw that he would have to yield. For fear of a greater disaster
he hastened towards the engine, wishing at all events to bring the
cages up, so that the cables, being cut above the shaft, should not
smash them by falling down with their enormous weight. The engine-man
had disappeared as well as the few daylight workers; and he took hold
of the starting lever, manipulating it while Levaque and two other
climbed up the metal scaffold which supported the pulleys. The cages
were hardly fixed on the keeps when the strident sound was heard of
the file biting into the steel. There was deep silence, and this
noise seemed to fill the whole pit; all raised their heads, looking
and listening, seized by emotion. In the first rank Maheu felt a
fierce joy possess him, as if the teeth of the file would deliver
them from misfortune by eating into the cable of one of these dens of
wretchedness, into which they would never descend again.

But Mother Brul had disappeared by the shed stairs still shouting:

"The fires must be put out! To the boilers! to the boilers!"

Some women followed her. Maheude hastened to prevent them from smashing
everything, just as her husband had tried to reason with the men. She
was the calmest of them; one could demand one's rights without making
a mess in people's places. When she entered the boiler building the
women were already chasing away the two stokers, and the Brul, armed
with a large shovel, and crouching down before one of the stoves,
was violently emptying it, throwing the red-hot coke on to the brick
floor, where it continued to burn with black smoke. There were ten
stoves for the five boilers. Soon the women warmed to the work, the
Levaque manipulating her shovel with both hands, Mouquette raising her
clothes up to her thighs so as not to catch fire, all looking red in
the reflection of the flames, sweating and dishevelled in this witch's
kitchen. The piles of coal increased, and the burning heat cracked the
ceiling of the vast hall.

"Enough, now!" cried Maheude; "the store-room is afire."

"So much the better," replied Mother Brul. "That will do the work. Ah,
by God! haven't I said that I would pay them out for the death of my
man!"

At this moment Jeanlin's shrill voice was heard:

"Look out! I'll put it out, I will! I'll let it all off!"

He had come in among the first, and had kicked his legs about among the
crowd, delighted at the fray and seeking out what mischief he could do;
the idea had occurred to him to turn on the discharge taps and let off
the steam.

The jets came out with the violence of volleys; the five boilers were
emptied with the sound of a tempest, whistling in such a roar of
thunder that one's ears seemed to bleed. Everything had disappeared
in the midst of the vapour, the hot coal grew pale, and the women
were nothing more than shadows with broken gestures. The child alone
appeared mounted on the gallery, behind the whirlwinds of white steam,
filled with delight and grinning broadly in the joy of unchaining this
hurricane.

This lasted nearly a quarter of an hour. A few buckets of water had
been thrown over the heaps to complete their extinction; all danger of
a fire had gone by, but the anger of the crowd had not subsided; on
the contrary, it had been whipped up. Men went down with hammers, even
the women armed themselves with iron bars; and they talked of smashing
boilers, of breaking engines, and of demolishing the mine.

tienne, forewarned, hastened to come up with Maheu. He himself was
becoming intoxicated and carried away by this hot fever of revenge. He
struggled, however, and entreated them to be calm, now that, with cut
cables, extinguished fires, and empty boilers, work was impossible.
He was not always listened to; and was again about to be carried away
by the crowd, when hoots arose outside at a little low door where the
ladder passage emerged.

"Down with the traitors!--Oh! the dirty chops of the cowards!--Down
with them! down with them!"

The men were beginning to come up from below. The first arrivals,
blinded by the daylight, stood there with quivering eyelids. Then they
moved away, trying to gain the road and flee.

"Down with the cowards! down with the traitors!"

The whole band of strikers had run up. In less than three minutes there
was not a man left in the buildings; the five hundred Montsou men were
ranged in two rows, and the Vandame men, who had had the treachery to
go down, were forced to pass between this double hedge. And as every
fresh miner appeared at the door of the passage, covered with the
black mud of work and with garments in rags, the hooting redoubled,
and ferocious jokes arose. Oh! look at that one!--three inches of legs
and then his arse! and this one with his nose eaten by those Volcan
girls! and this other, with eyes pissing out enough wax to furnish
ten cathedrals! and this other, the tall fellow without a rump and as
long as Lent! An enormous putter-woman, who rolled out with her breast
to her belly and her belly to her backside, raised a furious laugh.
They wanted to handle them, the joking increased and was turning to
cruelty, blows would soon have rained; while the row of poor devils
came out shivering and silent beneath the abuse, with sidelong looks in
expectation of blows, glad when they could at last rush away out of the
mine.

"Hallo! how many are there in there?" asked tienne.

He was astonished to see them still coming out, and irritated at the
idea that it was not a mere handful of workers, urged by hunger,
terrorized by the captains. They had lied to him, then, in the forest;
nearly all Jean-Bart had gone down. But a cry escaped from him and he
rushed forward when he saw Chaval standing on the threshold.

"By God! is this the rendezvous you called us to?"

Imprecations broke out and there was a movement of the crowd towards
the traitor. What! he had sworn with them the day before, and now they
found him down below with the others! Was he, then, making fools of
people?

"Off with him! To the shaft! to the shaft!"

Chaval, white with fear, stammered and tried to explain. But tienne
cut him short, carried out of himself and sharing the fury of the band.

"You wanted to be in it, and you shall be in it. Come on! take your
damned snout along!"

Another clamour covered his voice. Catherine, in her turn, had just
appeared, dazzled by the bright sunlight, and frightened at falling
into the midst of these savages. She was panting, with legs aching from
the hundred and two ladders, and with bleeding palms, when Maheude,
seeing her, rushed forward with her hand up.

"Ah! slut! you, too! When your mother is dying of hunger you betray her
for your bully!"

Maheu held back her arm, and stopped the blow. But he shook his
daughter; he was enraged, like his wife; he threw her conduct in her
face, and both lost their heads, shouting louder than their mates.

The sight of Catherine had completed tienne's exasperation. He
repeated:

"On we go to the other pits, and you come with us, you dirty devil!"

Chaval had scarcely time to get his sabots from the shed and to throw
his woollen jacket over his frozen shoulders. They all dragged him on,
forcing him to run in the midst of them. Catherine, bewildered, also
put on her sabots, buttoning at her neck her man's old jacket, with
which she kept off the cold; and she ran behind her lover, she would
not leave him, for surely they were going to murder him.

Then in two minutes Jean-Bart was emptied. Jeanlin had found a horn
and was blowing it, producing hoarse sounds, as though he were
gathering oxen together. The women--Mother Brul, the Levaque, and
Mouquette--raised their skirts to run, while Levaque, with an axe in
his hand, manipulated it like a drum-major's stick. Other men continued
to arrive; they were nearly a thousand, without order, again flowing on
to the road like a torrent let loose. The gates were too narrow, and
the palings were broken down.

"To the pits!--Down with the traitors!--No more work!"

And Jean-Bart fell suddenly into a great silence. Not a man was left,
not a breath was heard. Deneulin came out of the captains' room, and
quite alone, with a gesture forbidding any one to follow him, he went
over the pit. He was pale and very calm.

At first he stopped before the shaft, lifting his eyes to look at the
cut cables; the steel ends hung useless, the bite of the file had
left a living scar, a fresh wound which gleamed in the black grease.
Afterwards he went up to the engine, and looked at the crank, which
was motionless, like the joint of a colossal limb struck by paralysis.
He touched the metal, which had already cooled, and the cold made him
shudder as though he had touched a corpse. Then he went down to the
boiler-room, walked slowly before the extinguished stoves, yawning
and inundated, and struck his foot against the boilers, which sounded
hollow. Well! it was quite finished; his ruin was complete. Even if he
mended the cables and lit the fires, where would he find men? Another
fortnight's strike and he would be bankrupt. And in this certainty of
disaster he no longer felt any hatred of the Montsou brigands; he felt
that all had a complicity in it, that it was a general agelong fault.
They were brutes, no doubt, but brutes who could not read, and who were
dying of hunger.




CHAPTER IV


And the troop went off over the flat plain, white with frost beneath
the pale winter sun, and overflowed the path as they passed through the
beetroot fields.

From the Fourche-aux-Boeufs, tienne had assumed command. He cried
his orders while the crowd moved on, and organized the march. Jeanlin
galloped at the head, performing barbarous music on his horn. Then
the women came in the first ranks, some of them armed with sticks:
Maheude, with wild eyes seemed to be seeking afar for the promised
city of justice, Mother Brul, the Levaque woman, Mouquette, striding
along beneath their rags, like soldiers setting out for the seat of
war. If they had any encounters, we should see if the police dared
to strike women. And the men followed in a confused flock, a stream
that grew larger and larger, bristling with iron bars and dominated by
Levaque's single axe, with its blade glistening in the sun. tienne,
in the middle, kept Chaval in sight, forcing him to walk before him;
while Maheu, behind, gloomily kept an eye on Catherine, the only woman
among these men, obstinately trotting near her lover for fear that he
would be hurt. Bare heads were dishevelled in the air; only the clank
of sabots could be heard, like the movement of released cattle, carried
away by Jeanlin's wild trumpeting.

But suddenly a new cry arose:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

It was midday; the hunger of six weeks on strike was awaking in
these empty stomachs, whipped up by this race across the fields. The
few crusts of the morning and Mouquette's chestnuts had long been
forgotten; their stomachs were crying out, and this suffering was added
to their fury against the traitors.

"To the pits! No more work! Bread!"

tienne, who had refused to eat his share at the settlement, felt an
unbearable tearing sensation in his chest. He made no complaint, but
mechanically took his tin from time to time and swallowed a gulp of
gin, shaking so much that he thought he needed it to carry him to the
end. His cheeks were heated and his eyes inflamed. He kept his head,
however, and still wished to avoid needless destruction.

As they arrived at the Joiselle road a Vandame pikeman, who had joined
the band for revenge on his master, impelled the men towards the right,
shouting:

"To Gaston-Marie! Must stop the pump! Let the water ruin Jean-Bart!"

The mob was already turning, in spite of the protests of tienne,
who begged them to let the pumping continue. What was the good of
destroying the galleries? It offended his workman's heart, in spite
of his resentment. Maheu also thought it unjust to take revenge on
a machine. But the pikeman still shouted his cry of vengeance, and
tienne had to cry still louder:

"To Mirou! There are traitors down there! To Mirou! to Mirou!"

With a gesture, he had turned the crowd towards the left road; while
Jeanlin, going ahead, was blowing louder than ever. An eddy was
produced in the crowd; this time Gaston-Marie was saved.

And the four kilometres which separated them from Mirou were traversed
in half an hour, almost at running pace, across the interminable plain.
The canal on this side cut it with a long icy ribbon. The leafless
trees on the banks, changed by the frost into giant candelabra,
alone broke this pale uniformity, prolonged and lost in the sky at
the horizon as in a sea. An undulation of the ground hid Montsou and
Marchiennes; there was nothing but bare immensity.

They reached the pit, and found a captain standing on a foot-bridge at
the screening-shed to receive them. They all well knew Father Quandieu,
the _doyen_ of the Montsou captains, an old man whose skin and
hair were quite white, and who was in his seventies, a miracle of fine
health in the mines.

"What have you come after here, you pack of meddlers?" he shouted.

The band stopped. It was no longer a master, it was a mate; and a
certain respect held them back before this old workman.

"There are men down below," said tienne. "Make them come up."

"Yes, there are men there," said Father Quandieu, "some six dozen; the
others were afraid of you evil beggars! But I warn you that not one
comes up, or you will have to deal with me!"

Exclamations arose, the men pushed, the women advanced. Quickly coming
down from the foot-bridge, the captain now barred the door.

Then Maheu tried to interfere.

"It is our right, old man. How can we make the strike general if we
don't force all the mates to be on our side?"

The old man was silent a moment. Evidently his ignorance on the subject
of coalition equalled the pikeman's. At last he replied:

"It may be your right, I don't say. But I only know my orders. I am
alone here; the men are down till three, and they shall stay there till
three."

The last words were lost in hooting. Fists were threateningly advanced,
the women deafened him, and their hot breath blew in his face. But he
still held out, his head erect, and his beard and hair white as snow;
his courage had so swollen his voice that he could be heard distinctly
over the tumult.

"By God! you shall not pass! As true as the sun shines, I would rather
die than let you touch the cables. Don't push any more, or I'm damned
if I don't fling myself down the shaft before you!"

The crowd drew back shuddering and impressed. He went on:

"Where is the beast who does not understand that? I am only a workman
like you others. I have been told to guard here, and I'm guarding."

That was as far as Father Quandieu's intelligence went, stiffened by
his obstinacy of military duty, his narrow skull, and eyes dimmed by
the black melancholy of half a century spent underground. The men
looked at him moved, feeling within them an echo of what he said, this
military obedience, the sense of fraternity and resignation in danger.
He saw that they were hesitating still, and repeated:

"I'm damned if I don't fling myself down the shaft before you!"

A great recoil carried away the mob. They all turned, and in the rush
took the right-hand road, which stretched far away through the fields.
Again cries arose:

"To Madeleine! To Crvecoeur! no more work! Bread! bread!"

But in the centre, as they went on, there was hustling. It was Chaval,
they said, who was trying to take advantage of an opportunity to
escape. tienne had seized him by the arm, threatening to do for him if
he was planning some treachery. And the other struggled and protested
furiously:

"What's all this for? Isn't a man free? I've been freezing the last
hour. I want to clean myself. Let me go!"

He was, in fact, suffering from the coal glued to his skin by sweat,
and his woollen garment was no protection.

"On you go, or we'll clean you," replied tienne. "Don't expect to get
your life at a bargain."

They were still running, and he turned towards Catherine, who was
keeping up well. It annoyed him to feel her so near him, so miserable,
shivering beneath her man's old jacket and her muddy trousers. She must
be nearly dead of fatigue, she was running all the same.

"You can go off, you can," he said at last.

Catherine seemed not to hear. Her eyes, on meeting tienne's, only
flamed with reproach for a moment. She did not stop. Why did he want
her to leave her man? Chaval was not at all kind, it was true; he
would even beat her sometimes. But he was her man, the one who had had
her first; and it enraged her that they should throw themselves on
him--more than a thousand of them. She would have defended him without
any tenderness at all, out of pride.

"Off you go!" repeated Maheu, violently.

Her father's order slackened her course for a moment. She trembled, and
her eyelids swelled with tears. Then, in spite of her fear, she came
back to the same place again, still running. Then they let her be.

The mob crossed the Joiselle road, went a short distance up the Cron
road and then mounted towards Cougny. On this side, factory chimneys
striped the flat horizon; wooden sheds, brick workshops with large
dusty windows, appeared along the street. They passed one after another
the low buildings of two settlements--that of the Cent-Quatre-Vingts,
then that of the Soixante-Seize; and from each of them, at the sound of
the horn and the clamour arising from every mouth, whole families came
out--men, women, and children--running to join their mates in the rear.
When they came up to Madeleine there were at least fifteen hundred. The
road descended in a gentle slope; the rumbling flood of strikers had to
turn round the pit-bank before they could spread over the mine square.

It was now not more than two o'clock. But the captains had been warned
and were hastening the ascent as the band arrived. The men were all
up, only some twenty remained and were now disembarking from the cage.
They fled and were pursued with stones. Two were struck, another left
the sleeve of his jacket behind. This man-hunt saved the material, and
neither the cables nor the boilers were touched. The flood was already
moving away, rolling on towards the next pit.

This one, Crvecoeur, was only five hundred metres away from Madeleine.
There, also, the mob arrived in the midst of the ascent. A putter-girl
was taken and whipped by the women with her breeches split open and
her buttocks exposed before the laughing men. The trammer-boys had
their ears boxed, the pikemen got away, their sides blue from blows
and their noses bleeding. And in this growing ferocity, in this old
need of revenge which was turning every head with madness, the choked
cries went on, death to traitors, hatred against ill-paid work, the
roaring of bellies after bread. They began to cut the cables, but the
file would not bite, and the task was too long now that the fever was
on them for moving onward, for ever onward. At the boilers a tap was
broken; while the water, thrown by bucketsful into the stoves, made the
metal gratings burst.

Outside they were talking of marching on Saint-Thomas. This was the
best disciplined pit. The strike had not touched it, nearly seven
hundred men must have gone down there. This exasperated them; they
would wait for these men with sticks, ranged for battle, just to see
who would get the best of it. But the rumour ran along that there were
gendarmes at Saint-Thomas, the gendarmes of the morning whom they had
made fun of. How was this known? nobody could say. No matter! they
were seized by fear and decided on Feutry-Cantel. Their giddiness
carried them on, all were on the road, clanking their sabots, rushing
forward. To Feutry-Cantel! to Feutry-Cantel! The cowards there were
certainly four hundred in number and there would be fun! Situated three
kilometres away, this pit lay in a fold of the ground near the Scarpe.
They were already climbing the slope of the Platrires, beyond the road
to Beaugnies, when a voice, no one knew from whom, threw out the idea
that the soldiers were, perhaps, down there at Feutry-Cantel. Then from
one to the other of the column it was repeated that the soldiers were
down there. They slackened their march, panic gradually spread in the
country, idle without work, which they had been scouring for hours. Why
had they not come across any soldiers? This impunity troubled them, at
the thought of the repression which they felt to be coming.

Without any one knowing where it came from, a new word of command
turned them towards another pit.

"To the Victoire! to the Victoire!"

Were there, then, neither soldiers nor police at the Victoire? Nobody
knew. All seemed reassured. And turning round they descended from the
Beaumont side and cut across the fields to reach the Joiselle road. The
railway line barred their passage, and they crossed it, pulling down
the palings. Now they were approaching Montsou, the gradual undulation
of the landscape grew less, the sea of beetroot fields enlarged,
reaching far away to the black houses at Marchiennes.

This time it was a march of five good kilometres. So strong an impulse
pushed them on that they had no feeling of their terrible fatigue, or
of their bruised and wounded feet. The rear continued to lengthen,
increased by mates enlisted on the roads and in the settlements. When
they had passed the canal at the Magache bridge, and appeared before
the Victoire, there were two thousand of them. But three o'clock had
struck, the ascent was completed, not a man remained below. Their
disappointment was spent in vain threats; they could only heave
broken bricks at the workmen who had arrived to take their duty at
the earth-cutting. There was a rush, and the deserted pit belonged to
them. And in their rage at not finding a traitor's face to strike,
they attacked things. A rankling abscess was bursting within them, a
poisoned boil of slow growth. Years and years of hunger tortured them
with a thirst for massacre and destruction. Behind a shed tienne saw
some porters filling a wagon with coal.

"Will you just clear out of the bloody place!" he shouted. "Not a bit
of coal goes out!"

At his orders some hundred strikers ran up, and the porters only had
time to escape. Men unharnessed the horses, which were frightened and
set off, struck in the haunches; while others, overturning the wagon,
broke the shafts.

Levaque, with violent blows of his axe, had thrown himself on the
platforms to break down the foot-bridges. They resisted, and it
occurred to him to tear up the rails, destroying the line from one
end of the square to the other. Soon the whole band set to this task.
Maheu made the metal chairs leap up, armed with his iron bar which
he used as a lever. During this time Mother Brul led away the women
and invaded the lamp cabin, where their sticks covered the soil with
a carnage of lamps. Maheude, carried out of herself, was laying about
her as vigorously as the Levaque woman. All were soaked in oil, and
Mouquette dried her hands on her skirt, laughing to find herself so
dirty. Jeanlin for a joke, had emptied a lamp down her neck. But all
this revenge produced nothing to eat. Stomachs were crying out louder
than ever. And the great lamentation dominated still:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

A former captain at the Victoire kept a stall near by. No doubt he had
fled in fear, for his shed was abandoned. When the women came back, and
the men had finished destroying the railway, they besieged the stall,
the shutters of which yielded at once. They found no bread there; there
were only two pieces of raw flesh and a sack of potatoes. But in the
pillage they discovered some fifty bottles of gin, which disappeared
like a drop of water drunk up by the sand.

tienne, having emptied his tin, was able to refill it. Little by
little a terrible drunkenness, the drunkenness of the starved, was
inflaming his eyes and baring his teeth like a wolf's between his
pallid lips. Suddenly he perceived that Chaval had gone off in the
midst of the tumult. He swore, and men ran to seize the fugitive, who
was hiding with Catherine behind the timber supply.

"Ah! you dirty swine; you are afraid of getting into trouble!" shouted
tienne. "It was you in the forest who called for a strike of the
engine-men, to stop the pumps, and now you want to play us a filthy
trick! Very well! By God! we will go back to Gaston-Marie. I will have
you smash the pump; yes, by God! you shall smash it!"

He was drunk; he was urging his men against this pump which he had
saved a few hours earlier.

"To Gaston-Marie! to Gaston-Marie!"

They all cheered, and rushed on, while Chaval, seized by the shoulders,
was drawn and pushed violently along, while he constantly asked to be
allowed to wash.

"Will you take yourself off, then?" cried Maheu to Catherine who had
also begun to run again.

This time she did not even draw back, but turned her burning eyes on
her father, and went on running.

Once more the mob ploughed through the flat plain. They were retracing
their steps over the long straight paths, by the fields endlessly
spread out. It was four o'clock; the sun which approached the horizon,
lengthened the shadows of this horde with their furious gestures over
the frozen soil.

They avoided Montsou, and farther on rejoined the Joiselle road; to
spare the journey round Fourche-aux-Boeufs, they passed beneath the
walls of Piolaine. The Grgoires had just gone out, having to visit a
lawyer before going to dine with the Hennebeaus, where they would find
Ccile. The estate seemed asleep, with its avenue of deserted limes,
its kitchen garden and its orchard bared by the winter. Nothing was
stirring in the house, and the closed windows were dulled by the warm
steam within. Out of the profound silence an impression of good-natured
comfort arose, the patriarchal sensation of good beds and a good table,
the wise happiness of the proprietor's existence.

Without stopping, the band cast gloomy looks through the grating and at
the length of protecting walls, bristling with broken bottles. The cry
arose again:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

The dogs alone replied, by barking ferociously, a pair of Great Danes,
with rough coats, who stood with open jaws. And behind the closed
blind there were only the servants. Mlanie the cook and Honorine
the housemaid, attracted by this cry, pale and perspiring with fear
at seeing these savages go by. They fell on their knees, and thought
themselves killed on hearing a single stone breaking a pane of a
neighbouring window. It was a joke of Jeanlin's; he had manufactured a
sling with a piece of cord, and had just sent a little passing greeting
to the Grgoires. Already he was again blowing his horn, the band was
lost in the distance, and the cry grew fainter:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

They arrived at Gaston-Marie in still greater numbers, more than two
thousand five hundred madmen, breaking everything, sweeping away
everything, with the force of a torrent which gains strength as it
moves. The police had passed here an hour earlier, and had gone off
towards Saint-Thomas, led astray by some peasants; in their haste they
had not even taken the precaution of leaving a few men behind to guard
the pit. In less than a quarter of an hour the fires were overturned,
the boilers emptied, the buildings torn down and devastated. But it was
the pump which they specially threatened. It was not enough to stop it
in the last expiring breath of its steam; they threw themselves on it
as on a living person whose life they required.

"The first blow is yours!" repeated tienne, putting a hammer into
Chaval's hand. "Come! you have sworn with the others!"

Chaval drew back trembling, and in the hustling the hammer fell; while
other men, without waiting, battered the pump with blows from iron
bars, blows from bricks, blows from anything they could lay their hands
on. Some even broke sticks over it. The nuts leapt off, the pieces of
steel and copper were dislocated like torn limbs. The blow of a shovel,
delivered with full force, fractured the metal body; the water escaped
and emptied itself, and there was a supreme gurgle like an agonizing
death-rattle.

That was the end, and the mob found themselves outside again, madly
pushing on behind tienne, who would not let Chaval go.

"Kill him! the traitor! To the shaft! to the shaft!"

The livid wretch, clinging with imbecile obstinacy to his fixed idea,
continued to stammer his need of cleaning himself.

"Wait, if that bothers you, said the Levaque woman. "Here! here's a
bucket!"

There was a pond there, an infiltration of the water from the pump. It
was white with a thick layer of ice; and they struck it and broke the
ice, forcing him to dip his head in this cold water.

"Duck then," repeated Mother Brul. "By God! if you don't duck we'll
shove you in. And now you shall have a drink of it; yes, yes, like a
beast, with your jaws in the trough!"

He had to drink on all fours. They all laughed, with cruel laughter.
One woman pulled his ears, another woman threw in his face a handful
of dung found fresh on the road. His old woollen jacket in tatters no
longer held together. He was haggard, stumbling, and with struggling
movements of his hips he tried to flee.

Maheu had pushed him, and Maheude was among those who grew furious,
both of them satisfying their old spite; even Mouquette, who generally
remained such good friends with her old lovers, was wild with this one,
treating him as a good-for-nothing, and talking of taking his breeches
down to see if he was still a man.

tienne made her hold her tongue.

"That's enough. There's no need for all to set to it. If you like, you,
we will just settle it together."

His fists closed and his eyes were lit up with homicidal fury; his
intoxication was turning into the desire to kill.

"Are you ready? One of us must stay here. Give him a knife; I've got
mine."

Catherine, exhausted and terrified, gazed at him. She remembered his
confidences, his desire to devour a man when he had drunk, poisoned
after the third glass, to such an extent had his drunkards of parents
put this beastliness into his body. Suddenly she leapt forward, struck
him with both her woman's hands, and choking with indignation shouted
into his face:

"Coward! coward! coward! Isn't it enough, then, all these abominations?
You want to kill him now that he can't stand upright any longer!"

She turned towards her father and her mother; she turned towards the
others.

"You are cowards! cowards! Kill me, then, with him! I will tear your
eyes out, I will, if you touch him again. Oh! the cowards!"

And she planted herself before her man to defend him, forgetting the
blows, forgetting the life of misery, lifted up by the idea that she
belonged to him since he had taken her, and that it was a shame for her
when they so crushed him.

tienne had grown pale beneath this girl's blows. At first he had
been about to knock her down; then, after having wiped his face with
the movement of a man who is recovering from intoxication, he said to
Chaval, in the midst of deep silence:

"She is right; that's enough. Off you go."

Immediately Chaval was away, and Catherine galloped behind him. The
crowd gazed at them as they disappeared round a corner of the road; but
Maheude muttered:

"You were wrong; ought to have kept him. He is sure to be after some
treachery."

But the mob began to march on again. Five o'clock was about to strike.
The sun, as red as a furnace on the edge of the horizon, seemed to
set fire to the whole plain. A pedlar who was passing informed them
that the military were descending from the Crvecoeur side. Then they
turned. An order ran:

"To Montsou! To the manager!--Bread! bread! bread!"




CHAPTER V


M. Hennebeau had placed himself in front of his study window to watch
the departure of the carriage which was taking away his wife to
lunch at Marchiennes. His eyes followed Ngrel for a moment, as he
trotted beside the carriage door. Then he quietly returned and seated
himself at his desk. When neither his wife nor his nephew animated
the place with their presence the house seemed empty. On this day the
coachman was driving his wife; Rose, the new housemaid, had leave to
go out till five o'clock; there only remained Hippolyte, the valet de
chambre, trailing about the rooms in slippers, and the cook, who had
been occupied since dawn in struggling with her saucepans, entirely
absorbed in the dinner which was to be given in the evening. So M.
Hennebeau promised himself a day of serious work in this deep calm of
the deserted house.

Towards nine o'clock, although he had received orders to send every
one away, Hippolyte took the liberty of announcing Dansaert, who
was bringing news. The manager then heard, for the first time, of
the meeting in the forest the evening before; the details were very
precise, and he listened while thinking of the intrigue with Pierronne,
so well known that two or three anonymous letters every week denounced
the licentiousness of the head captain. Evidently the husband had
talked, and no doubt the wife had, too. He even took advantage of the
occasion; he let the head captain know that he was aware of everything,
contenting himself with recommending prudence for fear of a scandal.
Startled by these reproaches in the midst of his report, Dansaert
denied, stammered excuses, while his great nose confessed the crime
by its sudden redness. He did not insist, however, glad to get off so
easily; for, as a rule, the manager displayed the implacable severity
of the virtuous man whenever an employee allowed himself the indulgence
of a pretty girl in the pit. The conversation continued concerning the
strike; that meeting in the forest was only the swagger of blusterers;
nothing serious threatened. In any case, the settlements would surely
not stir for some days, beneath the impression of respectful fear which
must have been produced by the military promenade of the morning.

When M. Hennebeau was alone again he was, however, on the point of
sending a telegram to the prefect. Only the fear of uselessly showing
a sign of anxiety held him back. Already he could not forgive himself
his lack of insight in saying everywhere, and even writing to the
directors, that the strike would last at most a fortnight. It had
been going on and on for nearly two months, to his great surprise,
and he was in despair over it; he felt himself every day lowered and
compromised, and was forced to imagine some brilliant achievement
which would bring him back into favour with the directors. He had just
asked them for orders in the case of a skirmish. There was delay over
the reply, and he was expecting it by the afternoon post. He said to
himself that there would be time then to send out telegrams, and to
obtain the military occupation of the pits, if such was the desire of
those gentlemen. In his own opinion there would certainly be a battle
and an expenditure of blood. This responsibility troubled him in spite
of his habitual energy.

Up to eleven o'clock he worked peacefully; there was no sound in the
dead house except Hippolyte's waxing-stick, which was rubbing a floor
far away on the first floor. Then, one after the other, he received two
messages, the first announcing the attack on Jean-Bart by the Montsou
band, the second telling of the cut cables, the overturned fires, and
all the destruction. He could not understand. Why had the strikers gone
to Deneulin instead of attacking one of the Company's pits? Besides,
they were quite welcome to sack Vandame; that would merely ripen the
plan of conquest which he was meditating. And at midday he lunched
alone in the large dining-room, served so quietly by the servant
that he could not even hear his slippers. This solitude rendered his
preoccupations more gloomy; he was feeling cold at the heart when a
captain, who had arrived running, was shown in, and told him of the
mob's march on Mirou. Almost immediately, as he was finishing his
coffee, a telegram informed him that Madeleine and Crvecoeur were
in their turn threatened. Then his perplexity became extreme. He was
expecting the postman at two o'clock; ought he at once to ask for
troops? or would it be better to wait patiently, and not to act until
he had received the directors' orders? He went back into his study;
he wished to read a report which he had asked Ngrel to prepare the
day before for the prefect. But he could not put his hand on it; he
reflected that perhaps the young man had left it in his room, where he
often wrote at night, and without taking any decision, pursued by the
idea of this report, he went upstairs to look for it in the room.

As he entered, M. Hennebeau was surprised: the room had not been done,
no doubt through Hippolyte's forgetfulness or laziness. There was a
moist heat there, the close heat of the past night, made heavier from
the mouth of the hot-air stove being left open; and he was suffocated,
too, with a penetrating perfume, which he thought must be the odour
of the toilet waters with which the basin was full. There was great
disorder in the room--garments scattered about, damp towels thrown
on the backs of chairs, the bed yawning, with a sheet drawn back and
draggling on the carpet. But at first he only glanced round with an
abstracted look as he went towards a table covered with papers to look
for the missing report. Twice he examined the papers one by one, but it
was certainly not there. Where the devil could that madcap Paul have
stuffed it?

And as M. Hennebeau went back into the middle of the room, giving a
glance at each article of furniture, he noticed in the open bed a
bright point which shone like a star. He approached mechanically and
put out his hand. It was a little gold scent-bottle lying between two
folds of the sheet. He at once recognized a scent-bottle belonging to
Madame Hennebeau, the little ether bottle which was always with her.
But he could not understand its presence here: how could it have got
into Paul's bed? And suddenly he grew terribly pale. His wife had slept
there.

"Beg your pardon, sir," murmured Hippolyte's voice through the door. "I
saw you going up."

The servant entered and was thrown into consternation by the disorder.

"Lord! Why, the room is not done! So Rose has gone out, leaving all the
house on my shoulders!"

M. Hennebeau had hidden the bottle in his hand and was pressing it
almost to breaking.

"What do you want?"

"It's another man, sir; he has come from Crvecoeur with a letter."

"Good! Leave me alone; tell him to wait."

His wife had slept there! When he had bolted the door he opened his
hand again and looked at the little bottle which had left its image in
red on his flesh. Suddenly he saw and understood; this filthiness had
been going on in his house for months. He recalled his old suspicion,
the rustling against the doors, the naked feet at night through the
silent house. Yes, it was his wife who went up to sleep there!

Falling into a chair opposite the bed, which he gazed at fixedly,
he remained some minutes as though crushed. A noise aroused him;
someone was knocking at the door, trying to open it. He recognized the
servant's voice.

"Sir--Ah! you are shut in, sir."

"What is it now?"

"There seems to be a hurry; the men are breaking everything. There are
two more messengers below. There are also some telegrams."

"You just leave me alone! I am coming directly."

The idea that Hippolyte would himself have discovered the scent-bottle,
had he done the room in the morning, had just frozen him. And besides,
this man must know; he must have found the bed still hot with adultery
twenty times over, with madame's hairs trailing on the pillow, and
abominable traces staining the linen. The man kept interrupting him,
and it could only be out of inquisitiveness. Perhaps he had stayed with
his ear stuck to the door, excited by the debauchery of his masters.

M. Hennebeau did not move. He still gazed at the bed. His long past
of suffering unrolled before him: his marriage with this woman, their
immediate misunderstanding of the heart and of the flesh, the lovers
whom she had had unknown to him, and the lover whom he had tolerated
for ten years, as one tolerates an impure taste in a sick woman. Then
came their arrival at Montsou, the mad hope of curing her, months
of languor, of sleepy exile, the approach of old age which would,
perhaps, at last give her back to him. Then their nephew arrived, this
Paul to whom she became a mother, and to whom she spoke of her dead
heart buried for ever beneath the ashes. And he, the imbecile husband,
foresaw nothing; he adored this woman who was his wife, whom other men
had possessed, but whom he alone could not possess! He adored her with
shameful passion, so that he would have fallen on his knees if she
would but have given him the leavings of other men! The leavings of the
others she gave to this child.

The sound of a distant gong at this moment made M. Hennebeau start. He
recognized it; it was struck, by his orders, when the postman arrived.
He rose and spoke aloud, breaking into the flood of coarseness with
which his parched throat was bursting in spite of himself.

"Ah! I don't care a bloody hang for their telegrams and their letters!
not a bloody hang!"

Now he was carried away by rage, the need of some sewer in which to
stamp down all this filthiness with his heels. This woman was a vulgar
drab; he sought for crude words and buffeted her image with them. The
sudden idea of the marriage between Ccile and Paul, which she was
arranging with so quiet a smile, completed his exasperation. There
was, then, not even passion, not even jealousy at the bottom of this
persistent sensuality? It was now a perverse plaything, the habit of
the woman, a recreation taken like an accustomed dessert. And he put
all the responsibility on her, he regarded as almost innocent the lad
at whom she had bitten in this reawakening of appetite, just as one
bites at an early green fruit, stolen by the wayside. Whom would she
devour, on whom would she fall, when she no longer had complaisant
nephews, sufficiently practical to accept in their own family the
table, the bed, and the wife?

There was a timid scratch at the door, and Hippolyte allowed himself to
whisper through the keyhole:

"The postman, sir. And Monsieur Dansaert, too, has come back, saying
that they are killing one another."

"I'm coming down, good God!"

What should he do to them? Chase them away on their return from
Marchiennes, like stinking animals whom he would no longer have
beneath his roof? He would take a cudgel, and would tell them to carry
elsewhere their poisonous coupling. It was with their sighs, with their
mixed breaths, that the damp warmth of this room had grown heavy;
the penetrating odour which had suffocated him was the odour of musk
which his wife's skin exhaled, another perverse taste, a fleshly need
of violent perfumes; and he seemed to feel also the heat and odour of
fornication, of living adultery, in the pots which lay about, in the
basins still full, in the disorder of the linen, of the furniture,
of the entire room tainted with vice. The fury of impotence threw
him on to the bed, which he struck with his fists, belabouring the
places where he saw the imprint of their two bodies, enraged with the
disordered coverlets and the crumpled sheets, soft and inert beneath
his blows, as though exhausted themselves by the embraces of the whole
night.

But suddenly he thought he heard Hippolyte coming up again. He was
arrested by shame. For a moment he stood panting, wiping his forehead,
calming the bounds of his heart. Standing before a mirror he looked at
his face, so changed that he did not recognize himself. Then, when he
had watched it gradually grow calmer by an effort of supreme will, he
went downstairs.

Five messengers were standing below, not counting Dansaert. All brought
him news of increasing gravity concerning the march of the strikers
among the pits: and the chief captain told him at length what had gone
on at Mirou and the fine behaviour of Father Quandieu. He listened,
nodding his head, but he did not hear; his thoughts were in the room
upstairs. At last he sent them away, saying that he would take due
measures. When he was alone again, seated before his desk, he seemed
to grow drowsy, with his head between his hands, covering his eyes.
His mail was there, and he decided to look for the expected letter,
the directors' reply. The lines at first danced before him, but he
understood at last that these gentlemen desired a skirmish; certainly
they did not order him to make things worse, but they allowed it to be
seen that disturbances would hasten the conclusion of the strike by
provoking energetic repression. After this, he no longer hesitated, but
sent off telegrams on all sides--to the prefect of Lille, to the corps
of soldiery at Douai, to the police at Marchiennes. It was a relief; he
had nothing to do but shut himself in; he even spread the report that
he was suffering from gout. And all the afternoon he hid himself in his
study, receiving no one, contenting himself with reading the telegrams
and letters which continued to rain in. He thus followed the mob from
afar, from Madeleine to Crvecoeur, from Crvecoeur to the Victoire,
from the Victoire to Gaston-Marie. Information also reached him of the
bewilderment of the police and the troops, wandering along the roads,
and always with their backs to the pit attacked. They might kill one
another, and destroy everything! He put his head between his hands
again, with his fingers over his eyes, and buried himself in the deep
silence of the empty house, where he only heard now and then the noise
of the cook's saucepans as she bustled about preparing the evening's
dinner.

The twilight was already darkening the room; it was five o'clock when a
disturbance made M. Hennebeau jump, as he sat dazed and inert with his
elbows in his papers. He thought that it was the two wretches coming
back. But the tumult increased, and a terrible cry broke out just as he
was going to the window:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

It was the strikers, now invading Montsou, while the police, expecting
an attack on the Voreux, were galloping off in the opposite direction
to occupy that pit.

Just then, two kilometres away from the first houses, a little beyond
the crossways where the main road cut the Vandame road, Madame
Hennebeau and the young ladies had witnessed the passing of the mob.
The day had been spent pleasantly at Marchiennes; there had been a
delightful lunch with the manager of the Forges, then an interesting
visit to the workshops and to the neighbouring glass works to occupy
the afternoon; and as they were now going home in the limpid decline
of the beautiful winter day, Ccile had had the whim to drink a glass
of milk, as she noticed a little farm near the edge of the road. They
all then got down from the carriage, and Ngrel gallantly leapt off
his horse; while the peasant-woman, alarmed by all these fine people,
rushed about, and spoke of laying a cloth before serving the milk. But
Lucie and Jeanne wanted to see the cow milked, and they went into the
cattle-shed with their cups, making a little rural party, and laughing
greatly at the litter in which one sank.

Madame Hennebeau, with her complacent maternal air, was drinking
with the edge of her lips, when a strange roaring noise from without
disturbed her.

"What is that, then?"

The cattle-shed, built at the edge of the road, had a large door for
carts, for it was also used as a barn for hay. The young girls, who had
put out their heads, were astonished to see on the left a black flood,
a shouting band which was moving along the Vandame road.

"The deuce!" muttered Ngrel, who had also gone out. "Are our brawlers
getting angry at last?"

"It is perhaps the colliers again," said the peasant-woman. "This is
twice they've passed. Seems things are not going well; they're masters
of the country."

She uttered every word prudently, watching the effect on their faces;
and when she noticed the fright of all of them, and their deep anxiety
at this encounter, she hastened to conclude:

"Oh, the rascals! the rascals!"

Ngrel, seeing that it was too late to get into their carriage and
reach Montsou, ordered the coachman to bring the vehicle into the
farmyard, where it would remain hidden behind a shed. He himself
fastened his horse, which a lad had been holding, beneath the shed.
When he came back he found his aunt and the young girls distracted, and
ready to follow the peasant-woman, who proposed that they should take
refuge in her house. But he was of opinion that they would be safer
where they were, for certainly no one would come and look for them in
the hay. The door, however, shut very badly, and had such large chinks
in it, that the road could be seen between the worm-eaten planks.

"Come, courage!" he said. "We will sell our lives dearly."

This joke increased their fear. The noise grew louder, but nothing
could yet be seen; along the vacant road the wind of a tempest seemed
to be blowing, like those sudden gusts which precede great storms.

"No, no! I don't want to look," said Ccile, going to hide herself in
the hay.

Madame Hennebeau, who was very pale and felt angry with these people
who had spoilt her pleasure, stood in the background with a sidelong
look of repugnance; while Lucie and Jeanne, though trembling, had
placed their eyes at a crack, anxious to lose nothing of the spectacle.

A sound of thunder came near, the earth was shaken, and Jeanlin
galloped up first, blowing into his horn.

"Take out your scent-bottles, the sweat of the people is passing by!"
murmured Ngrel, who, in spite of his republican convictions, liked to
make fun of the populace when he was with ladies.

But this witticism was carried away in the hurricane of gestures
and cries. The women had appeared, nearly a thousand of them, with
outspread hair dishevelled by running, the naked skin appearing through
their rags, the nakedness of females weary with giving birth to
starvelings. A few held their little ones in their arms, raising them
and shaking them like banners of mourning and vengeance. Others, who
were younger with the swollen breasts of amazons, brandished sticks;
while frightful old women were yelling so loudly that the cords of
their fleshless necks seemed to be breaking. And then the men came up,
two thousand madmen--trammers, pikemen, menders--a compact mass which
rolled along like a single block in confused serried rank so that it
was impossible to distinguish their faded trousers or ragged woollen
jackets, all effaced in the same earthy uniformity. Their eyes were
burning, and one only distinguished the holes of black mouths singing
the _Marseillaise_; the stanzas were lost in a confused roar,
accompanied by the clang of sabots over the hard earth. Above their
heads, amid the bristling iron bars, an axe passed by, carried erect;
and this single axe, which seemed to be the standard of the band,
showed in the clear air the sharp profile of a guillotine-blade.

"What atrocious faces!" stammered Madame Hennebeau.

Ngrel said between his teeth:

"Devil take me if I can recognize one of them! Where do the bandits
spring from?"

And in fact anger, hunger, these two months of suffering and this
enraged helter-skelter through the pits had lengthened the placid
faces of the Montsou colliers into the muzzles of wild beasts. At
this moment the sun was setting; its last rays of sombre purple cast
a gleam of blood over the plain. The road seemed to be full of blood;
men and women continued to rush by, bloody as butchers in the midst of
slaughter.

"Oh! superb!" whispered Lucie and Jeanne, stirred in their artistic
tastes by the beautiful horror of it.

They were frightened, however, and drew back close to Madame Hennebeau,
who was leaning on a trough. She was frozen at the thought that a
glance between the planks of that disjointed door might suffice to
murder them. Ngrel also, who was usually very brave, felt himself grow
pale, seized by a terror that was superior to his will, the terror
which comes from the unknown. Ccile, in the hay, no longer stirred;
and the others, in spite of the wish to turn away their eyes, could not
do so: they were compelled to gaze.

It was the red vision of the revolution, which would one day inevitably
carry them all away, on some bloody evening at the end of the century.
Yes, some evening the people, unbridled at last, would thus gallop
along the roads, making the blood of the middle class flow, parading
severed heads and sprinkling gold from disembowelled coffers. The women
would yell, the men would have those wolf-like jaws open to bite. Yes,
the same rags, the same thunder of great sabots, the same terrible
troop, with dirty skins and tainted breath, sweeping away the old world
beneath an overflowing flood of barbarians. Fires would flame; they
would not leave standing one stone of the towns; they would return to
the savage life of the woods, after the great rut, the great feast-day,
when the poor in one night would emaciate the wives and empty the
cellars of the rich. There would be nothing left, not a sou of the
great fortunes, not a title-deed of properties acquired; until the day
dawned when a new earth would perhaps spring up once more. Yes, it
was these things which were passing along the road; it was the force
of nature herself, and they were receiving the terrible wind of it in
their faces.

A great cry arose, dominating the _Marseillaise_:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

Lucie and Jeanne pressed themselves against Madame Hennebeau, who was
almost fainting; while Ngrel placed himself before them as though
to protect them by his body. Was the old social order cracking this
very evening? And what they saw immediately after completed their
stupefaction. The band had nearly passed by, there were only a few
stragglers left, when Mouquette came up. She was delaying, watching
the bourgeois at their garden gates or the windows of their houses;
and whenever she saw them, as she was not able to spit in their faces,
she showed them what for her was the climax of contempt. Doubtless she
perceived someone now, for suddenly she raised her skirts, bent her
back, and showed her enormous buttocks, naked beneath the last rays of
the sun. There was nothing obscene in those fierce buttocks, and nobody
laughed.

Everything disappeared: the flood rolled on to Montsou along the turns
of the road, between the low houses streaked with bright colours. The
carriage was drawn out of the yard, but the coachman would not take it
upon him to convey back madame and the young ladies without delay; the
strikers occupied the street. And the worst was, there was no other
road.

"We must go back, however, for dinner will be ready," said Madame
Hennebeau, exasperated by annoyance and fear. "These dirty workpeople
have again chosen a day when I have visitors. How can you do good to
such creatures?"

Lucie and Jeanne were occupied in pulling Ccile out of the hay. She
was struggling, believing that those savages were still passing by,
and repeating that she did not want to see them. At last they all took
their places in the carriage again. It then occurred to Ngrel, who had
remounted, that they might go through the Rquillart lanes.

"Go gently," he said to the coachman, "for the road is atrocious. If
any groups prevent you from returning to the road over there, you can
stop behind the old pit, and we will return on foot through the little
garden door, while you can put up the carriage and horses anywhere, in
some inn outhouse."

They set out. The band, far away, was streaming into Montsou. As they
had twice seen police and military, the inhabitants were agitated and
seized by panic. Abominable stories were circulating; it was said that
written placards had been set up threatening to rip open the bellies of
the bourgeois. Nobody had read them, but all the same they were able
to quote the exact words. At the lawyer's especially the terror was
at its height, for he had just received by post an anonymous letter
warning him that a barrel of powder was buried in his cellar, and that
it would be blown up if he did not declare himself on the side of the
people. Just then the Grgoires, prolonging their visit on the arrival
of this letter, were discussing it, and decided that it must be the
work of a joker, when the invasion of the mob completed the terror of
the house. They, however, smiled, drawing back a corner of the curtain
to look out, and refused to admit that there was any danger, certain,
they said, that all would finish up well. Five o'clock struck, and they
had time to wait until the street was free for them to cross the road
to dine with the Hennebeaus, where Ccile, who had surely returned,
must be waiting for them. But no one in Montsou seemed to share their
confidence. People were wildly running about; doors and windows were
banged to. They saw Maigrat, on the other side of the road, barricading
his shop with a large supply of iron bars, and looking so pale and
trembling that his feeble little wife was obliged to fasten the screws.
The band had come to a halt before the manager's villa, and the cry
echoed:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

M. Hennebeau was standing at the window when Hippolyte came in to close
the shutters, for fear the windows should be broken by stones. He
closed all on the ground floor, and then went up to the first floor;
the creak of the window-fasteners was heard and the clack of the
shutters one by one. Unfortunately, it was not possible to shut the
kitchen window in the area in the same way, a window made disquietingly
ruddy by the gleams from the saucepans and the spit.

Mechanically, M. Hennebeau, who wished to look out, went up to Paul's
room on the second floor: it was on the left, the best situated, for it
commanded the road as far as the Company's Yards. And he stood behind
the blinds overlooking the crowd. But this room had again overcome
him, the toilet table sponged and in order, the cold bed with neat and
well-drawn sheets. All his rage of the afternoon, that furious battle
in the depths of his silent solitude, had now turned to an immense
fatigue. His whole being was now like this room, grown cold, swept of
the filth of the morning, returned to its habitual correctness. What
was the good of a scandal? had anything really changed in his house?
His wife had simply taken another lover; that she had chosen him in the
family scarcely aggravated the fact; perhaps even it was an advantage,
for she thus preserved appearances. He pitied himself when he thought
of his mad jealousy. How ridiculous to have struck that bed with his
fists! Since he had tolerated another man, he could certainly tolerate
this one. It was only a matter of a little more contempt. A terrible
bitterness was poisoning his mouth, the uselessness of everything, the
eternal pain of existence, shame for himself who always adored and
desired this woman in the dirt in which he had abandoned her.

Beneath the window the yells broke out with increased violence:

"Bread! bread! bread!"

"Idiots!" said M. Hennebeau between his clenched teeth.

He heard them abusing him for his large salary, calling him a bloated
idler, a bloody beast who stuffed himself to indigestion with good
things, while the worker was dying of hunger. The women had noticed the
kitchen, and there was a tempest of imprecations against the pheasant
roasting there, against the sauces that with fat odours irritated their
empty stomachs. Ah! the stinking bourgeois, they should be stuffed with
champagne and truffles till their guts burst.

"Bread! bread! bread!"

"Idiots!" repeated M. Hennebeau; "am I happy?"

Anger arose in him against these people who could not understand. He
would willingly have made them a present of his large salary to possess
their hard skin and their facility of coupling without regret. Why
could he not seat them at his table and stuff them with his pheasant,
while he went to fornicate behind the hedges, to tumble the girls over,
making fun of those who had tumbled them over before him! He would have
given everything, his education, his comfort, his luxury, his power
as manager, if he could be for one day the vilest of the wretches who
obeyed him, free of his flesh, enough of a blackguard to beat his wife
and to take his pleasure with his neighbours' wives. And he longed also
to be dying of hunger, to have an empty belly, a stomach twisted by
cramps that would make his head turn with giddiness: perhaps that would
have killed the eternal pain. Ah! to live like a brute, to possess
nothing, to scour the fields with the ugliest and dirtiest putter, and
to be able to be happy!

"Bread! bread! bread!"

Then he grew angry and shouted furiously in the tumult:

"Bread! is that enough, idiots!"

He could eat, and all the same he was groaning with torment. His
desolate household, his whole wounded life, choked him at the throat
like a death agony. Things were not all for the best because one had
bread. Who was the fool who placed earthly happiness in the partition
of wealth? These revolutionary dreamers might demolish society and
rebuilt another society; they would not add one joy to humanity,
they would not take away one pain, by cutting bread-and-butter for
everybody. They would even enlarge the unhappiness of the earth; they
would one day make the very dogs howl with despair when they had taken
them out of the tranquil satisfaction of instinct, to raise them to the
unappeasable suffering of passion. No, the one good thing was not to
exist, and if one existed, to be a tree, a stone, less still, a grain
of sand, which cannot bleed beneath the heels of the passer-by.

And in this exasperation of his torment, tears swelled in M.
Hennebeau's eyes, and broke in burning drops on his cheeks. The
twilight was drowning the road when stones began to riddle the front
of the villa. With no anger now against these starving people, only
enraged by the burning wound at his heart he continued to stammer in
the midst of his tears:

"Idiots! idiots!"

But the cry of the belly dominated, and a roar blew like a tempest,
sweeping everything before it:

"Bread! bread! bread!"




CHAPTER VI


Sobered by Catherine's blows, tienne had remained at the head of his
mates. But while he was hoarsely urging them on to Montsou, he heard
another voice within him, the voice of reason, asking, in astonishment,
the meaning of all this. He had not intended any of these things; how
had it happened that, having set out for Jean-Bart with the object of
acting calmly and preventing disaster, he had finished this day of
increasing violence by besieging the manager's villa?

He it certainly was, however, who had just cried, "Halt!" Only at first
his sole idea had been to protect the Company's Yards, which there had
been talk of sacking. And now that stones were already grazing the
facade of the villa, he sought in vain for some lawful prey on which to
throw the band, so as to avoid greater misfortunes. As he thus stood
alone, powerless, in the middle of the road, he was called by a man
standing on the threshold of the Estaminet Tison, where the landlady
had just put up the shutters in haste, leaving only the door free.

"Yes, it's me. Will you listen?"

It was Rasseneur. Some thirty men and women, nearly all belonging to
the settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante, who had remained at home in
the morning and had come in the evening for news, had invaded this
estaminet on the approach of the strikers. Zacharie occupied a table
with his wife, Philomne. Farther on, Pierron and Pierronne, with their
backs turned, were hiding their faces. No one was drinking, they had
simply taken shelter.

tienne recognized Rasseneur and was turning away, when the latter
added:

"You don't want to see me, eh? I warned you, things are getting
awkward. Now you may ask for bread, they'll give you lead."

Then tienne came back and replied:

"What troubles me is, the cowards who fold their arms and watch us
risking our skins."

"Your notion, then, is to pillage over there?" asked Rasseneur.

"My notion is to remain to the last with our friends, quit by dying
together."

In despair, tienne went back into the crowd, ready to die. On the
road, three children were throwing stones, and he gave them a good
kick, shouting out to his comrades that it was no good breaking windows.

Bbert and Lydie, who had rejoined Jeanlin, were learning from him how
to work the sling. They each sent a flint, playing at who could do the
most damage. Lydie had awkwardly cracked the head of a woman in the
crowd, and the two boys were loudly laughing. Bonnemort and Mouque,
seated on a bench, were gazing at them behind. Bonnemort's swollen legs
bore him so badly, that he had great difficulty in dragging himself
so far; no one knew what curiosity impelled him, for his face had the
earthy look of those days when he never spoke a word.

Nobody, however, any longer obeyed tienne. The stones, in spite of his
orders, went on hailing, and he was astonished and terrified by these
brutes he had unmuzzled, who were so slow to move and then so terrible,
so ferociously tenacious in their rage. All the old Flemish blood was
there, heavy and placid, taking months to get heated, and then giving
itself up to abominable savagery, listening to nothing until the beast
was glutted by atrocities. In his southern land crowds flamed up more
quickly, but they did not effect so much. He had to struggle with
Levaque to obtain possession of his axe, and he knew not how to keep
back the Maheus, who were throwing flints with both hands. The women,
especially, terrified him--the Levaque, Mouquette, and the others--who
were agitated by murderous fury, with teeth and nails out, barking like
bitches, and driven on by Mother Brul, whose lean figure dominated
them.

But there was a sudden stop; a moment's surprise brought a little of
that calmness which tienne's supplications could not obtain. It was
simply the Grgoires, who had decided to bid farewell to the lawyer,
and to cross the road to the manager's house; and they seemed so
peaceful, they so clearly had the air of believing that the whole
thing was a joke on the part of their worthy miners, whose resignation
had nourished them for a century, that the latter, in fact, left off
throwing stones, for fear of hitting this old gentleman and old lady
who had fallen from the sky. They allowed them to enter the garden,
mount the steps, and ring at the barricaded door, which was by no means
opened in a hurry. Just then, Rose, the housemaid, was returning,
laughing at the furious workmen, all of whom she knew, for she belonged
to Montsou. And it was she who, by striking her fists against the
door, at last forced Hippolyte to set it ajar. It was time, for as the
Grgoires disappeared, the hail of stones began again. Recovering from
its astonishment, the crowd was shouting louder than ever:

"Death to the bourgeois! Hurrah for the people!"

Rose went on laughing, in the hall of the villa, as though amused by
the adventure, and repeated to the terrified man-servant:

"They're not bad-hearted; I know them."

M. Grgoire methodically hung up his hat. Then, when he had assisted
Madame Grgoire to draw off her thick cloth mantle, he said, in his
turn:

"Certainly, they have no malice at bottom. When they have shouted well
they will go home to supper with more appetite."

At this moment M. Hennebeau came down from the second floor. He had
seen the scene, and came to receive his guests in his usual cold and
polite manner. The pallor of his face alone revealed the grief which
had shaken him. The man was tamed; there only remained in him the
correct administrator resolved to do his duty.

"You know," he said, "the ladies have not yet come back."

For the first time some anxiety disturbed the Grgoires. Ccile not
come back! How could she come back now if the miners were to prolong
their joking?

"I thought of having the place cleared," added M. Hennebeau. "But the
misfortune is that I'm alone here, and, besides, I do not know where to
send my servant to bring me four men and a corporal to clear away this
mob."

Rose, who had remained there, ventured to murmur anew:

"Oh, sir! they are not bad-hearted!"

The manager shook his head, while the tumult increased outside, and
they could hear the dull crash of the stones against the house.

"I don't wish to be hard on them, I can even excuse them; one must be
as foolish as they are to believe that we are anxious to injure them.
But it is my duty to prevent disturbance. To think that there are
police all along the roads, as I am told, and that I have not been able
to see a single man since the morning!"

He interrupted himself, and drew back before Madame Grgoire, saying:

"Let me beg you, madame, do not stay here, come into the drawing-room."

But the cook, coming up from below in exasperation, kept them in the
hall a few minutes longer. She declared that she could no longer accept
any responsibility for the dinner, for she was expecting from the
Marchiennes pastrycook some _vol-au-vent_ crusts which she had
ordered for four o'clock. The pastrycook had evidently turned aside
on the road for fear of these bandits. Perhaps they had even pillaged
his hampers. She saw the _vol-au-vent_ blockaded behind a bush,
besieged, going to swell the bellies of the three thousand wretches
who were asking for bread. In any case, monsieur was warned; she would
rather pitch her dinner into the fire if it was to be spoilt because of
the revolt.

"Patience, patience," said M. Hennebeau. "All is not lost, the
pastrycook may come."

And as he turned toward Madame Grgoire, opening the drawing-room door
himself, he was much surprised to observe, seated on the hall bench, a
man whom he had not distinguished before in the deepening shade.

"What! you, Maigrat! what is it, then?"

Maigrat arose; his fat, pale face was changed by terror. He no longer
possessed his usual calm stolidity; he humbly explained that he had
slipped into the manager's house to ask for aid and protection should
the brigands attack his shop.

"You see that I am threatened myself, and that I have no one," replied
M. Hennebeau. "You would have done better to stay at home and guard
your property."

"Oh! I have put up iron bars and left my wife there."

The manager showed impatience, and did not conceal his contempt. A fine
guard, that poor creature worn out by blows!

"Well, I can do nothing; you must try to defend yourself. I advise you
to go back at once, for there they are again demanding bread. Listen!"

In fact, the tumult began again, and Maigrat thought he heard his own
name in the midst of the cries. To go back was no longer possible, they
would have torn him to pieces. Besides, the idea of his ruin overcame
him. He pressed his face to the glass panel of the door, perspiring and
trembling in anticipation of disaster, while the Grgoires decided to
go into the drawing-room.

M. Hennebeau quietly endeavoured to do the honours of his house. But
in vain he begged his guests to sit down; the close, barricaded room,
lighted by two lamps in the daytime, was filled with terror at each
new clamour from without. Amid the stuffy hangings the fury of the mob
rolled more disturbingly, with vague and terrible menace. They talked,
however, constantly brought back to this inconceivable revolt. He was
astonished at having foreseen nothing; and his information was so
defective that he specially talked against Rasseneur, whose detestable
influence, he said, he was able to recognize. Besides, the gendarmes
would come; it was impossible that he should be thus abandoned. As
to the Grgoires, they only thought about their daughter, the poor
darling who was so quickly frightened! Perhaps, in face of the peril,
the carriage had returned to Marchiennes. They waited on for another
quarter of an hour, worn out by the noise in the street, and by the
sound of the stones from time to time striking the closed shutters
which rang out like gongs. The situation was no longer bearable. M.
Hennebeau spoke of going out to chase away the brawlers by himself, and
to meet the carriage, when Hippolyte appeared, exclaiming:

"Sir! sir, here is madame! They are killing madame!"

The carriage had not been able to pass through the threatening groups
in the Rquillart lane. Ngrel had carried out his idea, walking the
hundred metres which separated them from the house, and knocking at
the little door which led to the garden, near the common. The gardener
would hear them, for there was always someone there to open. And, at
first, things had gone perfectly; Madame Hennebeau and the young ladies
were already knocking when some women, who had been warned, rushed into
the lane. Then everything was spoilt. The door was not opened, and
Ngrel in vain sought to burst it open with his shoulder. The rush of
women increased, and fearing they would be carried away, he adopted the
desperate method of pushing his aunt and the girls before him, in order
to reach the front steps, by passing through the besiegers. But this
manoeuvre led to a hustling. They were not left free, a shouting band
followed them, while the crowd floated up to right and to left, without
understanding, simply astonished at these dressed-up ladies lost in the
midst of the battle. At this moment the confusion was so great that
it led to one of those curious mistakes which can never be explained.
Lucie and Jeanne reached the steps, and slipped in through the door,
which the housemaid opened; Madame Hennebeau had succeeded in following
them, and behind them Ngrel at last came in, and then bolted the door,
feeling sure that he had seen Ccile go in first. She was no longer
there, having disappeared on the way, so carried away by fear, that she
had turned her back to the house, and had moved of her own accord into
the thick of danger.

At once the cry arose:

"Hurrah for the people! Death to the bourgeois! To death with them!"

A few of those in the distance, beneath the veil which hid her face,
mistook her for Madame Hennebeau; others said she was a friend of the
manager's wife, the young wife of a neighbouring manufacturer who
was execrated by his men. And besides it mattered little, it was her
silk dress, her fur mantle, even the white feather in her hat, which
exasperated them. She smelled of perfume, she wore a watch, she had the
delicate skin of a lazy woman who had never touched coal.

"Stop!" shouted Mother Brul, "we'll put it on your arse, that lace!"

"The lazy sluts steal it from us," said the Levaque. "They stick fur
on to their skins while we are dying of cold. Just strip her naked, to
show her how to live!"

At once Mouquette rushed forward.

"Yes, yes! whip her!"

And the women, in this savage rivalry, struggled and stretched out
their rags, as though each were trying to get a morsel of this rich
girl. No doubt her backside was not better made than any one else's.
More than one of them were rotten beneath their gewgaws. This injustice
had lasted quite long enough; they should be forced to dress themselves
like workwomen, these harlots who dared to spend fifty sous on the
washing of a single petticoat.

In the midst of these furies Ccile was shaking with paralysed legs,
stammering over and over again the same phrase:

"Ladies! please! please! Ladies, please don't hurt me!"

But she suddenly uttered a shrill cry; cold hands had seized her by
the neck. The rush had brought her near old Bonnemort, who had taken
hold of her. He seemed drunk from hunger, stupefied by his long misery,
suddenly arousing himself from the resignation of half a century, under
the influence of no one knew what malicious impulse. After having in
the course of his life saved a dozen mates from death, risking his
bones in fire-damps and landslips, he was yielding to things which he
would not have been able to express, compelled to do thus, fascinated
by this young girl's white neck. And as on this day he had lost his
tongue, he clenched his fingers, with his air of an old infirm animal
ruminating over his recollections.

"No! no!" yelled the women. "Uncover her arse! out with her arse!"

In the villa, as soon as they had realized the mishap, Ngrel and M.
Hennebeau bravely reopened the door to run to Ccile's help. But the
crowd was now pressing against the garden railings, and it was not easy
to go out. A struggle took place here, while the Grgoires in terror
stood on the steps.

"Let her be then, old man! It's the Piolaine young lady," cried Maheude
to the grandfather, recognizing Ccile, whose veil had been torn off by
one of the women.

On his side, tienne, overwhelmed at this retaliation on a child, was
trying to force the band to let go their prey. An inspiration came to
him; he brandished the axe, which he had snatched from Levaque's hands.

"To Maigrat's house, by God! there's bread in there! Down to the earth
with Maigrat's damned shed!"

And at random he gave the first blow of the axe against the shop door.
Some comrades had followed him--Levaque, Maheu, and a few others. But
the women were furious, and Ccile had fallen from Bonnemort's fingers
into Mother Brul's hands. Lydie and Bbert, led by Jeanlin, had
slipped on all fours between her petticoats to see the lady's bottom.
Already the women were pulling her about; her clothes were beginning
to split, when a man on horseback appeared, pushing on his animal, and
using his riding-whip on those who would not stand back quick enough.

"Ah! rascals! You are going to flog our daughters, are you?"

It was Deneulin who had come to the rendezvous for dinner. He quickly
jumped on to the road, took Ccile by the waist, and, with the other
hand manipulating his horse with remarkable skill and strength, he used
it as a living wedge to split the crowd, which drew back before the
onset. At the railing the battle continued. He passed through, however,
with some bruises. This unforeseen assistance delivered Ngrel and M.
Hennebeau, who were in great danger amid the oaths and blows. And while
the young man at last led in the fainting Ccile, Deneulin protected
the manager with his tall body, and at the top of the steps received a
stone which nearly put his shoulder out.

"That's it," he cried; "break my bones now you've broken my engines!"

He promptly pushed the door to, and a volley of flints fell against it.

"What madmen!" he exclaimed. "Two seconds more, and they would have
broken my skull like an empty gourd. There is nothing to say to them;
what could you do? They know nothing, you can only knock them down."

In the drawing-room, the Grgoires were weeping as they watched Ccile
recover. She was not hurt, there was not even a scratch to be seen,
only her veil was lost. But their fright increased when they saw before
them their cook, Mlanie, who described how the mob had demolished
Piolaine. Mad with fear she had run to warn her masters. She had come
in when the door was ajar at the moment of the fray, without any one
noticing her; and in her endless narrative the single stone with which
Jeanlin had broken one window-pane became a regular cannonade which had
crushed through the walls. Then M. Grgoire's ideas were altogether
upset: they were murdering his daughter, they were razing his house to
the ground; it was, then, true that these miners could bear him ill
will, because he lived like a worthy man on their labour?

The housemaid, who had brought in a towel and some eau-de-Cologne,
repeated:

"All the same it's queer, they're not bad-hearted."

Madame Hennebeau, seated and very pale, had not recovered from the
shock to her feelings; and she was only able to find a smile when
Ngrel was complimented. Ccile's parents especially thanked the young
man, and the marriage might now be regarded as settled. M. Hennebeau
looked on in silence, turning from his wife to this lover whom in the
morning he had been swearing to kill, then to this young girl by whom
he would, no doubt, soon be freed from him. There was no haste, only
the fear remained with him of seeing his wife fall lower, perhaps to
some lackey.

"And you, my little darlings," asked Deneulin of his daughters; "have
they broken any of your bones?"

Lucie and Jeanne had been much afraid, but they were pleased to have
seen it all. They were now laughing.

"By George!" the father went on, "we've had a fine day! If you want a
dowry, you would do well to earn it yourselves, and you may also expect
to have to support me."

He was joking, but his voice trembled. His eyes swelled with tears as
his two daughters threw themselves into his arms.

M. Hennebeau had heard this confession of ruin. A quick thought lit up
his face. Vandame would now belong to Montsou; this was the hoped-for
compensation, the stroke of fortune which would bring him back to
favour with the gentlemen on the directorate. At every crisis of his
existence, he took refuge in the strict execution of the orders he had
received; in the military discipline in which he lived he found his
small share of happiness.

But they grew calm; the drawing-room fell back into a weary
peacefulness, with the quiet light of its two lamps, and the warm
stuffiness of the hangings. What, then, was going on outside? The
brawlers were silent, and stones no longer struck the house; one only
heard deep, full blows, those blows of the hatchet which one hears in
distant woods. They wished to find out, and went back into the hall to
venture a glance through the glass panel of the door. Even the ladies
went upstairs to post themselves behind the blinds on the first floor.

"Do you see that scoundrel, Rasseneur, over there on the threshold of
the public-house?" said M. Hennebeau to Deneulin. "I had guessed as
much; he must be in it."

It was not Rasseneur, however, it was tienne, who was dealing blows
from his axe at Maigrat's shop. And he went on calling to the men; did
not the goods in there belong to the colliers? Had they not the right
to take back their property from this thief who had exploited them so
long, who was starving them at a hint from the Company? Gradually they
all left the manager's house, and ran up to pillage the neighbouring
shop. The cry, "Bread! bread! bread!" broke out anew. They would find
bread behind that door. The rage of hunger carried them away, as if
they suddenly felt that they could wait no longer without expiring on
the road. Such furious thrusts were made at the door that at every
stroke of the axe tienne feared to wound someone.

Meanwhile Maigrat, who had left the hall of the manager's house, had
at first taken refuge in the kitchen; but, hearing nothing there, he
imagined some abominable attempt against his shop, and came up again
to hide behind the pump outside, when he distinctly heard the cracking
of the door and shouts of pillage in which his own name was mixed. It
was not a nightmare, then. If he could not see, he could now hear, and
he followed the attack with ringing ears; every blow struck him in the
heart. A hinge must have given way; five minutes more and the shop
would be taken. The thing was stamped on his brain in real and terrible
images--the brigands rushing forward, then the drawers broken open, the
sacks emptied, everything eaten, everything drunk, the house itself
carried away, nothing left, not even a stick with which he might go and
beg through the villages. No, he would never allow them to complete
his ruin; he would rather leave his life there. Since he had been here
he noticed at a window of his house his wife's thin silhouette, pale
and confused, behind the panes; no doubt she was watching the blows
with her usual silent air of a poor beaten creature. Beneath there was
a shed, so placed that from the villa garden one could climb it from
the palings; then it was easy to get on to the tiles up to the window.
And the idea of thus returning home now pursued him in his remorse at
having left. Perhaps he would have time to barricade the shop with
furniture; he even invented other and more heroic defences--boiling
oil, lighted petroleum, poured out from above. But this love of his
property struggled against his fear, and he groaned in the battle with
cowardice. Suddenly, on hearing a deeper blow of the axe, he made up
his mind. Avarice conquered; he and his wife would cover the sacks with
their bodies rather than abandon a single loaf.

Almost immediately hooting broke out:

"Look! look!--The tom-cat's up there! After the cat! after the cat!"

The mob had just seen Maigrat on the roof of the shed. In his fever of
anxiety he had climbed the palings with agility in spite of his weight,
and without troubling over the breaking wood; and now he was flattening
himself along the tiles, and endeavouring to reach the window. But the
slope was very steep; he was incommoded by his stoutness, and his nails
were torn. He would have dragged himself up, however, if he had not
begun to tremble with the fear of stones; for the crowd, which he could
not see, continued to cry beneath him:

"After the cat! after the cat!--Do for him!"

And suddenly both his hands let go at once, and he rolled down like a
ball, leapt at the gutter, and fell across the middle wall in such a
way that, by ill-chance, he rebounded on the side of the road, where
his skull was broken open on the corner of a stone pillar. His brain
had spurted out. He was dead. His wife up above, pale and confused
behind the window-panes, still looked out.

They were stupefied at first. tienne stopped short, and the axe
slipped from his hands. Maheu, Levaque, and the others forgot the shop,
with their eyes fixed on the wall along which a thin red streak was
slowly flowing down. And the cries ceased, and silence spread over the
growing darkness.

All at once the hooting began again. It was the women, who rushed
forward overcome by the drunkenness of blood.

"Then there is a good God, after all! Ah! the bloody beast, he's done
for!"

They surrounded the still warm body. They insulted it with laughter,
abusing his fractured head, the dirty chops, hurling in the dead man's
face the long venom of their starved lives.

"I owed you sixty francs, now you're paid, thief!" said Maheude,
enraged like the others. "You won't refuse me credit any more. Wait!
wait! I must fatten you once more!"

With her fingers she scratched up some earth, took two handfuls and
stuffed it violently into his mouth.

"There! eat that! There! eat! eat! you used to eat us!"

The abuse increased, while the dead man, stretched on his back, gazed
motionless with his large fixed eyes at the immense sky from which the
night was falling. This earth heaped in his mouth was the bread he had
refused to give. And henceforth he would eat of no other bread. It had
not brought him luck to starve poor people.

But the women had another revenge to wreak on him. They moved round,
smelling him like she-wolves. They were all seeking for some outrage,
some savagery that would relieve them.

Mother Brul's shrill voice was heard: "Cut him like a tom-cat!"

"Yes, yes, after the cat! after the cat! He's done too much, the dirty
beast!"

Mouquette was already unfastening and drawing off the trousers, while
the Levaque woman raised the legs. And Mother Brul with her dry old
hands separated the naked thighs and seized this dead virility. She
took hold of everything, tearing with an effort which bent her lean
spine and made her long arms crack. The soft skin resisted; she had to
try again, and at last carried away the fragment, a lump of hairy and
bleeding flesh, which she brandished with a laugh of triumph.

"I've got it! I've got it!"

Shrill voices saluted with curses the abominable trophy.

"Ah! swine! you won't fill our daughters any more!"

"Yes! we've done with paying on your beastly body; we shan't any more
have to offer a backside in return for a loaf."

"Here, I owe you six francs; would you like to settle it? I'm quite
willing, if you can do it still!"

This joke shook them all with terrible gaiety. They showed each other
the bleeding fragment as an evil beast from which each of them had
suffered, and which they had at last crushed, and saw before them
there, inert, in their power. They spat on it, they thrust out their
jaws, saying over and over again, with furious bursts of contempt:

"He can do no more! he can do no more!--It's no longer a man that
they'll put away in the earth. Go and rot then, good-for-nothing!"

Mother Brul then planted the whole lump on the end of her stick, and
holding it in the air, bore it about like a banner, rushing along the
road, followed, helter-skelter, by the yelling troop of women. Drops
of blood rained down, and that pitiful flesh hung like a waste piece
of meat on a butcher's stall. Up above, at the window, Madame Maigrat
still stood motionless; but beneath the last gleams of the setting
sun, the confused flaws of the window-panes distorted her white face
which looked as though it were laughing. Beaten and deceived at every
hour, with shoulders bent from morning to night over a ledger, perhaps
she was laughing, while the band of women rushed along with that evil
beast, that crushed beast, at the end of the stick.

This frightful mutilation was accomplished in frozen horror. Neither
tienne nor Maheu nor the others had had time to interfere; they stood
motionless before this gallop of furies. At the door of the Estaminet
Tison a few heads were grouped--Rasseneur pale with disgust, Zacharie
and Philomne stupefied at what they had seen. The two old men,
Bonnemort and Mouque, were gravely shaking their heads. Only Jeanlin
was making fun, pushing Bbert with his elbow, and forcing Lydie to
look up. But the women were already coming back, turning round and
passing beneath the manager's windows. Behind the blinds the ladies
were stretching out their necks. They had not been able to observe
the scene, which was hidden from them by the wall, and they could not
distinguish well in the growing darkness.

"What is it they have at the end of that stick?" asked Ccile, who had
grown bold enough to look out.

Lucie and Jeanne declared that it must be a rabbit-skin.

"No, no," murmured Madame Hennebeau, "they must have been pillaging a
pork butcher's, it seems to be a remnant of a pig."

At this moment she shuddered and was silent. Madame Grgoire had nudged
her with her knee. They both remained stupefied. The young ladies, who
were very pale, asked no more questions, but with large eyes followed
this red vision through the darkness.

tienne once more brandished the axe. But the feeling of anxiety did
not disappear; this corpse now barred the road and protected the shop.
Many had drawn back. Satiety seemed to have appeased them all. Maheu
was standing by gloomily, when he heard a voice whisper in his ear to
escape. He turned round and recognized Catherine, still in her old
overcoat, black and panting. With a movement he repelled her. He would
not listen to her, he threatened to strike her. With a gesture of
despair she hesitated, and then ran towards tienne.

"Save yourself! save yourself! the gendarmes are coming!"

He also pushed her away and abused her, feeling the blood of the
blows she had given him mounting to his cheeks. But she would not be
repelled; she forced him to throw down the axe, and drew him away by
both arms, with irresistible strength.

"Don't I tell you the gendarmes are coming! Listen to me. It's Chaval
who has gone for them and is bringing them, if you want to know. It's
too much for me, and I've come. Save yourself, I don't want them to
take you."

And Catherine drew him away, while, at the same instant, a heavy gallop
shook the street from afar. Immediately a voice arose: "The gendarmes!
the gendarmes!" There was a general breaking up, so mad a rush for life
that in two minutes the road was free, absolutely clear, as though
swept by a hurricane. Maigrat's corpse alone made a patch of shadow on
the white earth. Before the Estaminet Tison, Rasseneur only remained,
feeling relieved, and with open face applauding the easy victory of the
sabres; while in dim and deserted Montsou, in the silence of the closed
houses, the bourgeois remained with perspiring skins and chattering
teeth, not daring to look out. The plain was drowned beneath the thick
night, only the blast furnaces and the coke furnaces were burning
against the tragic sky. The gallop of the gendarmes heavily approached;
they came up in an indistinguishable sombre mass. And behind them the
Marchiennes pastrycook's vehicle, a little covered cart which had been
confided to their care, at last arrived, and a small drudge of a boy
jumped down and quietly unpacked the crusts for the _vol-au-vent_.




PART SIX




CHAPTER I


The first fortnight of February passed and a black cold prolonged
the hard winter without pity for the poor. Once more the authorities
had scoured the roads; the prefect of Lille, an attorney, a general,
and the police were not sufficient, the military had come to occupy
Montsou; a whole regiment of men were camped between Beaugnies and
Marchiennes. Armed pickets guarded the pits, and there were soldiers
before every engine. The manager's villa, the Company's Yards, even
the houses of certain residents, were bristling with bayonets. Nothing
was heard along the streets but the slow movement of patrols. On the
pit-bank of the Voreux a sentinel was always placed in the frozen wind
that blew up there, like a look-out man above the flat plain; and every
two hours, as though in an enemy's country, were heard the sentry's
cries:

"_Qui vive?_--Advance and give the password!"

Nowhere had work been resumed. On the contrary, the strike had spread;
Crvecoeur, Mirou, Madeleine, like the Voreux, were producing nothing;
at Feutry-Cantel and the Victoire there were fewer men every morning;
even at Saint-Thomas, which had been hitherto exempt, men were wanting.
There was now a silent persistence in the face of this exhibition of
force which exasperated the miners' pride. The settlements looked
deserted in the midst of the beetroot fields. Not a workman stirred,
only at rare intervals was one to be met by chance, isolated, with
sidelong look, lowering his head before the red trousers. And in this
deep melancholy calm, in this passive opposition to the guns, there was
a deceptive gentleness, a forced and patient obedience of wild beasts
in a cage, with their eyes on the tamer, ready to spring on his neck if
he turned his back. The Company, who were being ruined by this death
of work, talked of hiring miners from the Borinage, on the Belgian
frontier, but did not dare; so that the battle continued as before
between the colliers, who were shut up at home, and the dead pits
guarded by soldiery.

On the morrow of that terrible day this calm had come about at once,
hiding such a panic that the greatest silence possible was kept
concerning the damage and the atrocities. The inquiry which had been
opened showed that Maigrat had died from his fall, and the frightful
mutilation of the corpse remained uncertain, already surrounded by a
legend. On its side, the Company did not acknowledge the disasters it
had suffered, any more than the Grgoires cared to compromise their
daughter in the scandal of a trial in which she would have to give
evidence. However, some arrests took place, mere supernumeraries as
usual, silly and frightened, knowing nothing. By mistake, Pierron was
taken off with handcuffs on his wrists as far as Marchiennes, to the
great amusement of his mates. Rasseneur, also, was nearly arrested
by two gendarmes. The management was content with preparing lists
of names and giving back certificates in large numbers. Maheu had
received his, Levaque also, as well as thirty-four of their mates in
the settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante alone. And all the severity
was directed against tienne, who had disappeared on the evening of
the fray, and who was being sought, although no trace of him could be
found. Chaval, in his hatred, had denounced him, refusing to name the
others at Catherine's appeal, for she wished to save her parents. The
days passed, every one felt that nothing was yet concluded; and with
oppressed hearts every one was awaiting the end.

At Montsou, during this period, the inhabitants awoke with a start
every night, their ears buzzing with an imaginary alarm-bell and their
nostrils haunted by the smell of powder. But what completed their
discomfiture was a sermon by the new cur, Abb Ranvier, that lean
priest with eyes like red-hot coals who had succeeded Abb Joire. He
was indeed unlike the smiling discreet man, so fat and gentle, whose
only anxiety was to live at peace with everybody. Abb Ranvier went
so far as to defend these abominable brigands who had dishonoured the
district. He found excuses for the atrocities of the strikers; he
violently attacked the middle class, throwing on them the whole of
the responsibility. It was the middle class which, by dispossessing
the Church of its ancient liberties in order to misuse them itself,
had turned this world into a cursed place of injustice and suffering;
it was the middle class which prolonged misunderstandings, which was
pushing on towards a terrible catastrophe by its atheism, by its
refusal to return to the old beliefs, to the fraternity of the early
Christians. And he dared to threaten the rich. He warned them that if
they obstinately persisted in refusing to listen to the voice of God,
God would surely put Himself on the side of the poor. He would take
back their fortunes from those who faithlessly enjoyed them, and would
distribute them to the humble of the earth for the triumph of His
glory. The devout trembled at this; the lawyer declared that it was
Socialism of the worst kind; all saw the cur at the head of a band,
brandishing a cross, and with vigorous blows demolishing the bourgeois
society of '89.

M. Hennebeau, when informed, contented himself with saying, as he
shrugged his shoulders:

"If he troubles us too much the bishop will free us from him."

And while the breath of panic was thus blowing from one end of the
plain to the other, tienne was dwelling beneath the earth, in
Jeanlin's burrow at the bottom of Rquillart. It was there that he was
in hiding; no one believed him so near; the quiet audacity of that
refuge, in the very mine, in that abandoned passage of the old pit,
had baffled search. Above, the sloes and hawthorns growing among the
fallen scaffolding of the belfry filled up the mouth of the hole. No
one ventured down; it was necessary to know the trick--how to hang on
to the roots of the mountain ash and to let go fearlessly, to catch
hold of the rungs that were still solid. Other obstacles also protected
him, the suffocating heat of the passage, a hundred and twenty metres
of dangerous descent, then the painful gliding on all fours for a
quarter of a league between the narrowed walls of the gallery before
discovering the brigand's cave full of plunder. He lived there in the
midst of abundance, finding gin there, the rest of the dried cod, and
provisions of all sorts. The large hay bed was excellent, and not a
current of air could be felt in this equal temperature, as warm as a
bath. Light, however, threatened to fail. Jeanlin, who had made himself
purveyor, with the prudence and discretion of a savage and delighted
to make fun of the police, had even brought him pomatum, but could not
succeed in putting his hands on a packet of candles.

After the fifth day tienne never lighted up except to eat. He could
not swallow in the dark. This complete and interminable night, always
of the same blackness, was his chief torment. It was in vain that he
was able to sleep in safety, that he was warm and provided with bread,
the night had never weighed so heavily on his brain. It seemed to him
even to crush his thoughts. Now he was living on thefts. In spite of
his communistic theories, old scruples of education arose, and he
contented himself with gnawing his share of dry bread. But what was to
be done? One must live, and his task was not yet accomplished. Another
shame overcame him: remorse for that savage drunkenness from the gin,
drunk in the great cold on an empty stomach, which had thrown him,
armed with a knife, on Chaval. This stirred in him the whole of that
unknown terror, the hereditary ill, the long ancestry of drunkenness,
no longer tolerating a drop of alcohol without falling into homicidal
mania. Would he then end as a murderer? When he found himself in
shelter, in this profound calm of the earth, seized by satiety of
violence, he had slept for two days the sleep of a brute, gorged and
overcome; and the depression continued, he lived in a bruised state
with bitter mouth and aching head, as after some tremendous spree. A
week passed by; the Maheus, who had been warned, were not able to send
a candle; he had to give up the enjoyment of light, even when eating.

Now tienne remained for hours stretched out on his hay. Vague ideas
were working within him for the first time: a feeling of superiority,
which placed him apart from his mates, an exaltation of his person
as he grew more instructed. Never had he reflected so much; he
asked himself the why of his disgust on the morrow of that furious
course among the pits; and he did not dare to reply to himself, his
recollections were repulsive to him, the ignoble desires, the coarse
instincts, the odour of all that wretchedness shaken out to the wind.
In spite of the torment of the darkness, he would come to hate the hour
for returning to the settlement. How nauseous were all these wretches
in a heap, living at the common bucket! There was not one with whom he
could seriously talk politics; it was a bestial existence, always the
same air tainted by onion, in which one choked! He wished to enlarge
their horizon, to raise them to the comfort and good manners of the
middle class, by making them masters; but how long it would take!
and he no longer felt the courage to await victory, in this prison
of hunger. By slow degrees his vanity of leadership, his constant
preoccupation of thinking in their place, left him free, breathing into
him the soul of one of those bourgeois whom he execrated.

Jeanlin one evening brought a candle-end, stolen from a carter's
lantern, and this was a great relief for tienne. When the darkness
began to stupefy him, weighing on his skull almost to madness, he
would light up for a moment; then, as soon as he had chased away the
nightmare, he extinguished the candle, miserly of this brightness which
was as necessary to his life as bread. The silence buzzed in his ears,
he only heard the flight of a band of rats, the cracking of the old
timber, the tiny sound of a spider weaving her web. And with eyes open,
in this warm nothingness, he returned to his fixed idea--the thought
of what his mates were doing above. Desertion on his part would have
seemed to him the worst cowardice. If he thus hid himself, it was to
remain free, to give counsel or to act. His long meditations had fixed
his ambition. While awaiting something better he would like to be
Pluchart, leaving manual work in order to work only at politics, but
alone, in a clean room, under the pretext that brain labour absorbs the
entire life and needs quiet.

At the beginning of the second week, the child having told him that
the police supposed he had gone over to Belgium, tienne ventured out
of his hole at nightfall. He wished to ascertain the situation, and
to decide if it was still well to persist. He himself considered the
game doubtful. Before the strike he felt uncertain of the result, and
had simply yielded to facts; and now, after having been intoxicated
with rebellion, he came back to this first doubt, despairing of making
the Company yield. But he would not yet confess this to himself; he
was tortured when he thought of the miseries of defeat, and the heavy
responsibility of suffering which would weigh upon him. The end of the
strike: was it not the end of his part, the overthrow of his ambition,
his life falling back into the brutishness of the mine and the horrors
of the settlement? And honestly, without any base calculation or
falsehood, he endeavoured to find his faith again, to prove to himself
that resistance was still possible, that Capital was about to destroy
itself in face of the heroic suicide of Labour.

Throughout the entire country, in fact, there was nothing but a long
echo of ruin. At night, when he wandered through the black country,
like a wolf who has come out of his forest, he seemed to hear the crash
of bankruptcies from one end of the plain to the other. He now passed
by the roadside nothing but closed dead workshops, becoming rotten
beneath the dull sky. The sugar works had especially suffered: the
Hoton sugar works, the Fauvelle works, after having reduced the number
of their hands, had come to grief one after the other. At the Dutilleul
flour works the last mill had stopped on the second Saturday of the
month, and the Bleuze rope works, for mine cables, had been quite
ruined by the strike. On the Marchiennes side the situation was growing
worse every day. All the fires were out at the Gagebois glass works,
men were continually being sent away from the Sonneville workshops,
only one of the three blast furnaces of the Forges was alight, and not
one battery of coke ovens was burning on the horizon. The strike of the
Montsou colliers, born of the industrial crisis which had been growing
worse for two years, had increased it and precipitated the downfall.
To the other causes of suffering--the stoppage of orders from America,
and the engorgement of invested capital in excessive production--was
now added the unforeseen lack of coal for the few furnaces which were
still kept up; and that was the supreme agony, this engine bread which
the pits no longer furnished. Frightened by the general anxiety, the
Company, by diminishing its output and starving its miners, inevitably
found itself at the end of December without a fragment of coal at
the surface of its pits. Everything held together, the plague blew
from afar, one fall led to another; the industries tumbled each other
over as they fell, in so rapid a series of catastrophes that the
shocks echoed in the midst of the neighbouring cities, Lille, Douai,
Valenciennes, where absconding bankers were bringing ruin on whole
families.

At the turn of a road tienne often stopped in the frozen night to
hear the rubbish raining down. He breathed deeply in the darkness,
the joy of annihilation seized him, the hope that day would dawn on
the extermination of the old world, with not a single fortune left
standing, the scythe of equality levelling everything to the ground.
But in this massacre it was the Company's pits that especially
interested him. He would continue his walk, blinded by the darkness,
visiting them one after the other, glad to discover some new disaster.
Landslips of increasing gravity continued to occur on account of the
prolonged abandonment of the passages. Above the north gallery of
Mirou the ground sank in to such an extent, that the Joiselle road,
for the distance of a hundred metres, had been swallowed up as though
by the shock of an earthquake; and the Company, disturbed at the
rumours raised by these accidents, paid the owners for their vanished
fields without bargaining. Crvecoeur and Madeleine, which lay in very
shifting rock, were becoming stopped up more and more. It was said that
two captains had been buried at the Victoire; there was an inundation
at Feutry-Cantel, it had been necessary to wall up a gallery for the
length of a kilometre at Saint-Thomas, where the ill-kept timbering
was breaking down everywhere. Thus every hour enormous sums were
spent, making great breaches in the shareholders' dividends; a rapid
destruction of the pits was going on, which must end at last by eating
up the famous Montsou deniers which had been centupled in a century.

In the face of these repeated blows, hope was again born in tienne;
he came to believe that a third month of resistance would crush the
monster--the weary, sated beast, crouching down there like an idol
in his unknown tabernacle. He knew that after the Montsou troubles
there had been great excitement in the Paris journals, quite a violent
controversy between the official newspapers and the opposition
newspapers, terrible narratives, which were especially directed against
the International, of which the empire was becoming afraid after having
first encouraged it; and the directors not daring to turn a deaf ear
any longer, two of them had condescended to come and hold an inquiry,
but with an air of regret, not appearing to care about the upshot; so
disinterested, that in three days they went away again, declaring that
everything was going on as well as possible. He was told, however, from
other quarters that during their stay these gentlemen sat permanently,
displaying feverish activity, and absorbed in transactions of which
no one about them uttered a word. And he charged them with affecting
confidence they did not feel, and came to look upon their departure as
a nervous flight, feeling now certain of triumph since these terrible
men were letting everything go.

But on the following night tienne despaired again. The Company's
back was too robust to be so easily broken; they might lose millions,
but later on they would get them back again by gnawing at their men's
bread. On that night, having pushed as far as Jean-Bart, he guessed
the truth when an overseer told him that there was talk of yielding
Vandame to Montsou. At Deneulin's house, it was said, the wretchedness
was pitiful, the wretchedness of the rich; the father ill in his
powerlessness, aged by his anxiety over money, the daughters struggling
in the midst of tradesmen, trying to save their shifts. There was
less suffering in the famished settlements than in this middle-class
house where they shut themselves up to drink water. Work had not been
resumed at Jean-Bart, and it had been necessary to replace the pump
at Gaston-Marie; while, in spite of all haste, an inundation had
already begun which made great expenses necessary. Deneulin had at
last risked his request for a loan of one hundred thousand francs from
the Grgoires, and the refusal, though he had expected it, completed
his dejection: if they refused, it was for his sake, in order to save
him from an impossible struggle; and they advised him to sell. He, as
usual, violently refused. It enraged him to have to pay the expenses of
the strike; he hoped at first to die of it, with the blood at his head,
strangled by apoplexy. Then what was to be done? He had listened to the
directors' offers. They wrangled with him, they depreciated this superb
prey, this repaired pit, equipped anew, where the lack of capital alone
paralysed the output. He would be lucky if he got enough out of it
to satisfy his creditors. For two days he had struggled against the
directors at Montsou, furious at the quiet way with which they took
advantage of his embarrassment and shouting his refusals at them in
his loud voice. And there the affair remained, and they had returned
to Paris to await patiently his last groans. tienne smelled out this
compensation for the disasters, and was again seized by discouragement
before the invincible power of the great capitalists, so strong in
battle that they fattened in defeat by eating the corpses of the small
capitalists who fell at their side.

The next day, fortunately, Jeanlin brought him a piece of good news. At
the Voreux the tubbing of the shaft was threatening to break, and the
water was filtering in from all the joints; in great haste a gang of
carpenters had been set on to repair it.

Up to now tienne had avoided the Voreux, warned by the everlasting
black silhouette of the sentinel stationed on the pit-bank above the
plain. He could not be avoided, he dominated in the air, like the flag
of the regiment. Towards three o'clock in the morning the sky became
overcast, and he went to the pit, where some mates explained to him
the bad condition of the tubbing; they even thought that it would have
to be done entirely over again, which would stop the output of coal
for three months. For a long time he prowled round, listening to the
carpenters' mallets hammering in the shaft. That wound which had to be
dressed rejoiced his heart.

As he went back in the early daylight, he saw the sentinel still on the
pit-bank. This time he would certainly be seen. As he walked he thought
about those soldiers who were taken from the people, to be armed
against the people. How easy the triumph of the revolution would be if
the army were suddenly to declare for it! It would be enough if the
workman and the peasant in the barracks were to remember their origin.
That was the supreme peril, the great terror, which made the teeth of
the middle class chatter when they thought of a possible defection of
the troops. In two hours they would be swept away and exterminated
with all the delights and abominations of their iniquitous life. It
was already said that whole regiments were tainted with Socialism.
Was it true? When justice came, would it be thanks to the cartridges
distributed by the middle class? And snatching at another hope, the
young man dreamed that the regiment, with its posts, now guarding the
pits, would come over to the side of the strikers, shoot down the
Company to a man, and at last give the mine to the miners.

He then noticed that he was ascending the pit-bank, his head filled
with these reflections. Why should he not talk with this soldier? He
would get to know what his ideas were. With an air of indifference, he
continued to come nearer, as though he were gleaning old wood among the
rubbish. The sentinel remained motionless.

"Eh! mate! damned weather," said tienne, at last. "I think we shall
have snow."

He was a small soldier, very fair, with a pale, gentle face covered
with red freckles. He wore his military great-coat with the awkwardness
of a recruit.

"Yes, perhaps we shall, I think," he murmured.

And with his blue eyes he gazed at the livid sky, the smoky dawn, with
soot weighing like lead afar over the plain.

"What idiots they are to put you here to freeze!" tienne went on. "One
would think the Cossacks were coming! And then there's always wind
here."

The little soldier shivered without complaining. There was certainly
a little cabin of dry stones there, where old Bonnemort used to take
shelter when it blew a hurricane, but the order being not to leave the
summit of the pit-bank, the soldier did not stir from it, his hands so
stiffened by cold that he could no longer feel his weapon. He belonged
to the guard of sixty men who were protecting the Voreux, and as this
cruel sentry-duty frequently came round, he had before nearly stayed
there for good with his dead feet. His work demanded it; a passive
obedience finished the benumbing process, and he replied to these
questions with the stammered words of a sleepy child.

tienne in vain endeavoured during a quarter of an hour to make
him talk about politics. He replied "yes" or "no" without seeming
to understand. Some of his comrades said that the captain was a
republican; as to him, he had no idea--it was all the same to him.
If he was ordered to fire, he would fire, so as not to be punished.
The workman listened, seized with the popular hatred against the
army--against these brothers whose hearts were changed by sticking a
pair of red pantaloons on to their buttocks.

"Then what's your name?"

"Jules."

"And where do you come from?"

"From Plogof, over there."

He stretched out his arm at random. It was in Brittany, he knew no
more. His small pale face grew animated. He began to laugh, and felt
warmer.

"I have a mother and a sister. They are waiting for me, sure enough.
Ah! it won't be for to-morrow. When I left, they came with me as far as
Pont-l'Abb. We had to take the horse to Lepalmec: it nearly broke its
legs at the bottom of the Audierne Hill. Cousin Charles was waiting for
us with sausages, but the women were crying too much, and it stuck in
our throats. Good Lord! what a long way off our home is!"

His eyes grew moist, though he was still laughing. The desert moorland
of Plogof, that wild storm-beaten point of the Raz, appeared to him
beneath a dazzling sun in the rosy season of heather.

"Do you think," he asked, "if I'm not punished, that they'll give me a
month's leave in two years?"

Then tienne talked about Provence, which he had left when he was quite
small. The daylight was growing, and flakes of snow began to fly in
the earthy sky. And at last he felt anxious on noticing Jeanlin, who
was prowling about in the midst of the bushes, stupefied to see him
up there. The child was beckoning to him. What was the good of this
dream of fraternizing with the soldiers? It would take years and years,
and his useless attempt cast him down as though he had expected to
succeed. But suddenly he understood Jeanlin's gesture. The sentinel was
about to be relieved, and he went away, running off to bury himself at
Rquillart, his heart crushed once more by the certainty of defeat;
while the little scamp who ran beside him was accusing that dirty beast
of a trooper of having called out the guard to fire at them.

On the summit of the pit-bank Jules stood motionless, with eyes
vacantly gazing at the falling snow. The sergeant was approaching with
his men, and the regulation cries were exchanged.

"_Qui vive?_--Advance and give the password!"

And they heard the heavy steps begin again, ringing as though on a
conquered country. In spite of the growing daylight, nothing stirred
in the settlements; the colliers remained in silent rage beneath the
military boot.




CHAPTER II


Snow had been falling for two days; since the morning it had ceased,
and an intense frost had frozen the immense sheet. This black country,
with its inky roads and walls and trees powdered with coal dust,
was now white, a single whiteness stretching out without end. The
Deux-Cent-Quarante settlement lay beneath the snow as though it had
disappeared. No smoke came out of the chimneys; the houses, without
fire and as cold as the stones in the street, did not melt the thick
layer on the tiles. It was nothing more than a quarry of white slabs
in the white plain, a vision of a dead village wound in its shroud.
Along the roads the passing patrols alone made a muddy mess with their
stamping.

Among the Maheus the last shovelful of cinders had been burnt the
evening before, and it was no use any longer to think of gleaning on
the pit-bank in this terrible weather, when the sparrows themselves
could not find a blade of grass. Alzire, from the obstinacy with which
her poor hands had dug in the snow, was dying. Maheude had to wrap her
up in the fragment of a coverlet while waiting for Dr. Vanderhaghen,
for whom she had twice gone out without being able to find him. The
servant had, however, promised that he would come to the settlement
before night, and the mother was standing at the window watching, while
the little invalid, who had wished to be downstairs, was shivering
on a chair, having the illusion that it was better there near the
cold grate. Old Bonnemort opposite, his legs bad once more, seemed
to be sleeping; neither Lnore nor Henri had come back from scouring
the roads, in company with Jeanlin, to ask for sous. Maheu alone was
walking heavily up and down the bare room, stumbling against the wall
at every turn, with the stupid air of an animal which can no longer see
its cage. The petroleum also was finished; but the reflection of the
snow from outside was so bright that it vaguely lit up the room, in
spite of the deepening night.

There was a noise of sabots, and the Levaque woman pushed open the
door like a gale of wind, beside herself, shouting furiously from the
threshold at Maheude:

"Then it's you who have said that I forced my lodger to give me twenty
sous when he sleeps with me?"

The other shrugged her shoulders.

"Don't bother me. I said nothing; and who told you so?"

"They tell me you said so; it doesn't concern you who it was. You even
said you could hear us at our dirty tricks behind the wall, and that
the filth gets into our house because I'm always on my back. Just tell
me you didn't say so, eh?"

Every day quarrels broke out as a result of the constant gossiping of
the women. Especially between those households which lived door to
door, squabbles and reconciliations took place every day. But never
before had such bitterness thrown them one against the other. Since the
strike hunger exasperated their rancour, so that they felt the need
of blows; an altercation between two gossiping women finished by a
murderous onset between their two men.

Just then Levaque arrived in his turn, dragging Bouteloup.

"Here's our mate; let him just say if he has given twenty sous to my
wife to sleep with her."

The lodger, hiding his timid gentleness in his great beard, protested
and stammered:

"Oh, that? No! Never anything! never!"

At once Levaque became threatening, and thrust his fist beneath Maheu's
nose.

"You know that won't do for me. If a man's got a wife like that, he
ought to knock her ribs in. If not, then you believe what she says."

"By God!" exclaimed Maheu, furious at being dragged out of his
dejection, "what is all this clatter again? Haven't we got enough to do
with our misery? Just leave me alone, damn you! or I'll let you know
it! And first, who says that my wife said so?"

"Who says so? Pierronne said so."

Maheude broke into a sharp laugh, and turning towards the Levaque woman:

"An! Pierronne, is it? Well! I can tell you what she told me. Yes, she
told me that you sleep with both your men--the one underneath and the
other on top!"

After that it was no longer possible to come to an understanding. They
all grew angry, and the Levaques, as a reply to the Maheus, asserted
that Pierronne had said a good many other things on their account; that
they had sold Catherine, that they were all rotten together, even to
the little ones, with a dirty disease caught by tienne at the Volcan.

"She said that! She said that!" yelled Maheu. "Good! I'll go to her, I
will, and if she says that she said that, she shall feel my hand on her
chops!"

He was carried out of himself, and the Levaques followed him to see
what would happen, while Bouteloup, having a horror of disputes,
furtively returned home. Excited by the altercation, Maheude was also
going out, when a complaint from Alzire held her back. She crossed the
ends of the coverlet over the little one's quivering body, and placed
herself before the window, looking out vaguely. And that doctor, who
still delayed!

At the Pierrons' door Maheu and the Levaques met Lydie, who was
stamping in the snow. The house was closed, and a thread of light
came though a crack in a shutter. The child replied at first to their
questions with constraint: no, her father was not there, he had gone to
the washhouse to join Mother Brul and bring back the bundle of linen.
Then she was confused, and would not say what her mother was doing.
At last she let out everything with a sly, spiteful laugh: her mother
had pushed her out of the door because M. Dansaert was there, and she
prevented them from talking. Since the morning he had been going about
the settlement with two policemen, trying to pick up workmen, imposing
on the weak, and announcing everywhere that if the descent did not take
place on Monday at the Voreux, the Company had decided to hire men from
the Borinage. And as the night came on he sent away the policemen,
finding Pierronne alone; then he had remained with her to drink a glass
of gin before a good fire.

"Hush! hold your tongue! We must see them," said Levaque, with a lewd
laugh. "We'll explain everything directly. Get off with you, youngster."

Lydie drew back a few steps while he put his eye to a crack in the
shutter. He stifled a low cry and his back bent with a quiver. In her
turn his wife looked through, but she said, as though taken by the
colic, that it was disgusting. Maheu, who had pushed her, wishing also
to see, then declared that he had had enough for his money. And they
began again, in a row, each taking his glance as at a peep-show. The
parlour, glittering with cleanliness, was enlivened by a large fire;
there were cakes on the table with a bottle and glasses, in fact quite
a feast. What they saw going on in there at last exasperated the two
men, who under other circumstances would have laughed over it for six
months. That she should let herself be stuffed up to the neck, with
her skirts in the air, was funny. But, good God! was it not disgusting
to do that in front of a great fire, and to get up one's strength with
biscuits, when the mates had neither a slice of bread nor a fragment of
coal?

"Here's father!" cried Lydie, running away.

Pierron was quietly coming back from the washhouse with the bundle of
linen on his shoulder. Maheu immediately addressed him:

"Here! they tell me that your wife says that I sold Catherine, and that
we are all rotten at home. And what do they pay you in your house, your
wife and the gentleman who is this minute wearing out her skin?"

The astonished Pierron could not understand, and Pierronne, seized
with fear on hearing the tumult of voices, lost her head and set the
door ajar to see what was the matter. They could see her, looking very
red, with her dress open and her skirt tucked up at her waist; while
Dansaert, in the background, was wildly buttoning himself up. The head
captain rushed away and disappeared trembling with fear that this story
would reach the manager's ears. Then there would be an awful scandal,
laughter, and hooting and abuse.

"You, who are always saying that other people are dirty!" shouted the
Levaque woman to Pierronne; "it's not surprising that you're clean when
you get the bosses to scour you."

"Ah! it's fine for her to talk!" said Levaque again. "Here's a trollop
who says that my wife sleeps with me and the lodger, one below and the
other above! Yes! yes! that's what they tell me you say."

But Pierronne, grown calm, held her own against this abuse, very
contemptuous in the assurance that she was the best looking and the
richest.

"I've said what I've said; just leave me alone, will you! What have my
affairs got to do with you, a pack of jealous creatures who want to get
over us because we are able to save up money! Get along! get along!
You can say what you like; my husband knows well enough why Monsieur
Dansaert was here."

Pierron, in fact, was furiously defending his wife. The quarrel turned.
They accused him of having sold himself, of being a spy, the Company's
dog; they charged him with shutting himself up, to gorge himself with
the good things with which the bosses paid him for his treachery.
In defence, he pretended that Maheu had slipped beneath his door a
threatening paper with two cross-bones and a dagger above. And this
necessarily ended in a struggle between the men, as the quarrels of the
women always did now that famine was enraging the mildest. Maheu and
Levaque rushed on Pierron with their fists, and had to be pulled off.

Blood was flowing from her son-in-law's nose, when Mother Brul, in her
turn, arrived from the washhouse. When informed of what had been going
on, she merely said:

"The damned beast dishonours me!"

The road was becoming deserted, not a shadow spotted the naked
whiteness of the snow, and the settlement, falling back into its
death-like immobility, went on starving beneath the intense cold.

"And the doctor?" asked Maheu, as he shut the door.

"Not come," replied Maheude, still standing before the window.

"Are the little ones back?"

"No, not back."

Maheu again began his heavy walk from one wall to the other, looking
like a stricken ox. Father Bonnemort, seated stiffly on his chair, had
not even lifted his head. Alzire also had said nothing, and was trying
not to shiver, so as to avoid giving them pain; but in spite of her
courage in suffering, she sometimes trembled so much that one could
hear against the coverlet the quivering of the little invalid girl's
lean body, while with her large open eyes she stared at the ceiling,
from which the pale reflection of the white gardens lit up the room
like moonshine.

The emptied house was now in its last agony, having reached a final
stage of nakedness. The mattress ticks had followed the wool to the
dealers; then the sheets had gone, the linen, everything that could be
sold. One evening they had sold a handkerchief of the grandfather's for
two sous. Tears fell over each object of the poor household which had
to go, and the mother was still lamenting that one day she had carried
away in her skirt the pink cardboard box, her man's old present, as one
would carry away a child to get rid of it on some doorstep. They were
bare; they had only their skins left to sell, so worn-out and injured
that no one would have given a farthing for them. They no longer even
took the trouble to search, they knew that there was nothing left, that
they had come to the end of everything, that they must not hope even
for a candle, or a fragment of coal, or a potato, and they were waiting
to die, only grieved about the children, and revolted by the useless
cruelty that gave the little one a disease before starving it.

"At last! here he is!" said Maheude.

A black figure passed before the window. The door opened. But it was
not Dr. Vanderhaghen; they recognized the new cur, Abb Ranvier, who
did not seem surprised at coming on this dead house, without light,
without fire, without bread. He had already been to three neighbouring
houses, going from family to family, seeking willing listeners, like
Dansaert with his two policemen; and at once he exclaimed, in his
feverish fanatic's voice:

"Why were you not at mass on Sunday, my children? You are wrong, the
Church alone can save you. Now promise me to come next Sunday."

Maheu, after staring at him, went on pacing heavily, without a word. It
was Maheude who replied:

"To mass, sir? What for? Isn't the good God making fun of us? Look
here! what has my little girl there done to Him, to be shaking with
fever? Hadn't we enough misery, that He had to make her ill too, just
when I can't even give her a cup of warm gruel?"

Then the priest stood and talked at length. He spoke of the strike,
this terrible wretchedness, this exasperated rancour of famine, with
the ardour of a missionary who is preaching to savages for the glory
of religion. He said that the Church was with the poor, that she would
one day cause justice to triumph by calling down the anger of God on
the iniquities of the rich. And that day would come soon, for the rich
had taken the place of God, and were governing without God, in their
impious theft of power. But if the workers desired the fair division
of the goods of the earth, they ought at once to put themselves in the
hands of the priests, just as on the death of Jesus the poor and the
humble grouped themselves around the apostles. What strength the pope
would have, what an army the clergy would have under them, when they
were able to command the numberless crowd of workers! In one week they
would purge the world of the wicked, they would chase away the unworthy
masters. Then, indeed, there would be a real kingdom of God, every
one recompensed according to his merits, and the law of labour as the
foundation for universal happiness.

Maheude, who was listening to him, seemed to hear tienne, in those
autumn evenings when he announced to them the end of their evils. Only
she had always distrusted the cloth.

"That's very well, what you say there, sir," she replied, "but that's
because you no longer agree with the bourgeois. All our other curs
dined at the manager's, and threatened us with the devil as soon as we
asked for bread."

He began again, and spoke of the deplorable misunderstanding between
the Church and the people. Now, in veiled phrases, he hit at the
town curs, at the bishops, at the highly placed clergy, sated with
enjoyment, gorged with domination, making pacts with the liberal middle
class, in the imbecility of their blindness, not seeing that it was
this middle class which had dispossessed them of the empire of the
world. Deliverance would come from the country priests, who would all
rise to re-establish the kingdom of Christ, with the help of the poor;
and already he seemed to be at their head; he raised his bony form like
the chief of a band, a revolutionary of the gospel, his eyes so filled
with light that they illuminated the gloomy room. This enthusiastic
sermon lifted him to mystic heights, and the poor people had long
ceased to understand him.

"No need for so many words," growled Maheu suddenly. "You'd best begin
by bringing us a loaf."

"Come on Sunday to mass," cried the priest. "God will provide for
everything."

And he went off to catechize the Levaques in their turn, so carried
away by his dream of the final triumph of the Church, and so
contemptuous of facts, that he would thus go through the settlements
without charities, with empty hands amid this army dying of hunger,
being a poor devil himself who looked upon suffering as the spur to
salvation.

Maheu continued his pacing, and nothing was heard but his regular tramp
which made the floor tremble. There was the sound of a rust-eaten
pulley; old Bonnemort was spitting into the cold grate. Then the rhythm
of the feet began again. Alzire, weakened by fever, was rambling in a
low voice, laughing, thinking that it was warm and that she was playing
in the sun.

"Good gracious!" muttered Maheude, after having touched her cheeks,
"how she burns! I don't expect that damned beast now, the brigands must
have stopped him from coming."

She meant the doctor and the Company. She uttered a joyous exclamation,
however, when the door once more opened. But her arms fell back and she
remained standing still with gloomy face.

"Good evening," whispered tienne, when he had carefully closed the
door.

He often came thus at night-time. The Maheus learnt his retreat after
the second day. But they kept the secret and no one in the settlement
knew exactly what had become of the young man. A legend had grown
up around him. People still believed in him and mysterious rumours
circulated: he would reappear with an army and chests full of gold; and
there was always the religious expectation of a miracle, the realized
ideal, a sudden entry into that city of justice which he had promised
them. Some said they had seen him lying back in a carriage, with three
other gentlemen, on the Marchiennes road; others affirmed that he was
in England for a few days. At length, however, suspicions began to
arise and jokers accused him of hiding in a cellar, where Mouquette
kept him warm; for this relationship, when known, had done him harm.
There was a growing disaffection in the midst of his popularity, a
gradual increase of the despairing among the faithful, and their number
was certain, little by little, to grow.

"What brutal weather!" he added. "And you--nothing new, always from bad
to worse? They tell me that little Ngrel has been to Belgium to get
Borains. Good God! we are done for if that is true!"

He shuddered as he entered this dark icy room, where it was some time
before his eyes were able to see the unfortunate people whose presence
he guessed by the deepening of the shade. He was experiencing the
repugnance and discomfort of the workman who has risen above his class,
refined by study and stimulated by ambition. What wretchedness! and
odours! and the bodies in a heap! And a terrible pity caught him by the
throat. The spectacle of this agony so overcame him that he tried to
find words to advise submission.

But Maheu came violently up to him, shouting:

"Borains! They won't dare, the bloody fools! Let the Borains go down,
then, if they want us to destroy the pits!"

With an air of constraint, tienne explained that it was not possible
to move, that the soldiers who guarded the pits would protect the
descent of the Belgian workmen. And Maheu clenched his fists, irritated
especially, as he said, by having bayonets in his back. Then the
colliers were no longer masters in their own place? They were treated,
then, like convicts, forced to work by a loaded musket! He loved his
pit, it was a great grief to him not to have been down for two months.
He was driven wild, therefore, at the idea of this insult, these
strangers whom they threatened to introduce. Then the recollection that
his certificate had been given back to him struck him to the heart.

"I don't know why I'm angry," he muttered. "I don't belong to their
shop any longer. When they have hunted me away from here, I may as well
die on the road."

"As to that," said tienne, "if you like, they'll take your certificate
back to-morrow. People don't send away good workmen."

He interrupted himself, surprised to hear Alzire, who was laughing
softly in the delirium of her fever. So far he had only made out Father
Bonnemort's stiff shadow, and this gaiety of the sick child frightened
him. It was indeed too much if the little ones were going to die of it.
With trembling voice he made up his mind.

"Look here! this can't go on, we are done for. We must give it up."

Maheude, who had been motionless and silent up to now, suddenly broke
out, and treating him familiarly and swearing like a man, she shouted
in his face:

"What's that you say? It's you who say that, by God!"

He was about to give reasons, but she would not let him speak.

"Don't repeat that, by God! or, woman as I am, I'll put my fist into
your face. Then we have been dying for two months, and I have sold
my household, and my little ones have fallen ill of it, and there is
to be nothing done, and the injustice is to begin again! Ah! do you
know! when I think of that my blood stands still. No, no, I would burn
everything, I would kill everything, rather than give up."

She pointed at Maheu in the darkness, with a vague, threatening gesture.

"Listen to this! If any man goes back to the pit, he'll find me waiting
for him on the road to spit in his face and cry coward!

tienne could not see her, but he felt a heat like the breath of a
barking animal. He had drawn back, astonished at this fury which was
his work. She was so changed that he could no longer recognize the
woman who was once so sensible, reproving his violent schemes, saying
that we ought not to wish any one dead, and who was now refusing to
listen to reason and talking of killing people. It was not he now,
it was she, who talked politics, who dreamed of sweeping away the
bourgeois at a stroke, who demanded the republic and the guillotine
to free the earth of these rich robbers who fattened on the labour of
starvelings.

"Yes, I could flay them with my fingers. We've had enough of them! Our
turn is come now; you used to say so yourself. When I think of the
father, the grandfather, the grandfather's father, what all of them who
went before have suffered, what we are suffering, and that our sons and
our sons' sons will suffer it over again, it makes me mad--I could take
a knife. The other day we didn't do enough at Montsou; we ought to have
pulled the bloody place to the ground, down to the last brick. And do
you know I've only one regret, that we didn't let the old man strangle
the Piolaine girl. Hunger may strangle my little ones for all they
care!"

Her words fell like the blows of an axe in the night. The closed
horizon would not open, and the impossible ideal was turning to poison
in the depths of this skull which had been crushed by grief.

"You have misunderstood," tienne was able to say at last, beating a
retreat. "We ought to come to an understanding with the Company. I know
that the pits are suffering much, so that it would probably consent to
an arrangement."

"No, never!" she shouted.

Just then Lnore and Henri came back with their hands empty. A
gentleman had certainly given them two sous, but the girl kept kicking
her little brother, and the two sous fell into the snow, and as Jeanlin
had joined in the search they had not been able to find them.

"Where is Jeanlin?"

"He's gone away, mother; he said he had business."

tienne was listening with an aching heart. Once she had threatened
to kill them if they ever held out their hands to beg. Now she sent
them herself on to the roads, and proposed that all of them--the ten
thousand colliers of Montsou--should take stick and wallet, like
beggars of old, and scour the terrified country.

The anguish continued to increase in the black room. The little urchins
came back hungry, they wanted to eat; why could they not have something
to eat? And they grumbled, flung themselves about, and at last trod on
the feet of their dying sister, who groaned. The mother furiously boxed
their ears in the darkness at random. Then, as they cried still louder,
asking for bread, she burst into tears, and dropped on to the floor,
seizing them in one embrace with the little invalid; then, for a long
time, her tears fell in a nervous outbreak which left her limp and worn
out, stammering over and over again the same phrase, calling for death:

"O God! why do you not take us? O God! in pity take us, to have done
with it!"

The grandfather preserved his immobility, like an old tree twisted
by the rain and wind; while the father continued walking between the
fireplace and the cupboard, without turning his head.

But the door opened, and this time it was Doctor Vanderhaghen.

"The devil!" he said. "This light won't spoil your eyes. Look sharp!
I'm in a hurry."

As usual, he scolded, knocked up by work. Fortunately, he had matches
with him, and the father had to strike six, one by one, and to hold
them while he examined the invalid. Unwound from her coverlet, she
shivered beneath this flickering light, as lean as a bird dying in the
snow, so small that one only saw her hump. But she smiled with the
wandering smile of the dying, and her eyes were very large; while her
poor hands contracted over her hollow breast. And as the half-choked
mother asked if it was right to take away from her the only child who
helped in the household, so intelligent and gentle, the doctor grew
vexed.

"Ah! she is going. Dead of hunger, your blessed child. And not the only
one, either; I've just seen another one over there. You all send for
me, but I can't do anything; it's meat that you want to cure you."

Maheu, with burnt fingers, had dropped the match, and the darkness
closed over the little corpse, which was still warm. The doctor had
gone away in a hurry. tienne heard nothing more in the black room
but Maheude's sobs, repeating her cry for death, that melancholy and
endless lamentation:

"O God! it is my turn, take me! O God! take my man, take the others,
out of pity, to have done with it!"




CHAPTER III


On that Sunday, ever since eight o'clock, Souvarine had been sitting
alone in the parlour of the Avantage, at his accustomed place, with
his head against the wall. Not a single collier knew where to get two
sous for a drink, and never had the bars had fewer customers. So Madame
Rasseneur, motionless at the counter, preserved an irritated silence;
while Rasseneur, standing before the iron fireplace, seemed to be
gazing with a reflective air at the brown smoke from the coal.

Suddenly, in this heavy silence of an over-heated room, three light
quick blows struck against one of the window-panes made Souvarine turn
his head. He rose, for he recognized the signal which tienne had
already used several times before, in order to call him, when he saw
him from without, smoking his cigarette at an empty table. But before
the engine-man could reach the door, Rasseneur had opened it, and,
recognizing the man who stood there in the light from the window, he
said to him:

"Are you afraid that I shall sell you? You can talk better here than on
the road."

tienne entered. Madame Rasseneur politely offered him a glass, which
he refused, with a gesture. The innkeeper added:

"I guessed long ago where you hide yourself. If I was a spy, as your
friends say, I should have sent the police after you a week ago."

"There is no need for you to defend yourself," replied the young man.
"I know that you have never eaten that sort of bread. People may have
different ideas and esteem each other all the same."

And there was silence once more. Souvarine had gone back to his chair,
with his back to the wall and his eyes fixed on the smoke from his
cigarette, but his feverish fingers were moving restlessly, and he ran
them over his knees, seeking the warm fur of Poland, who was absent
this evening; it was an unconscious discomfort, something that was
lacking, he could not exactly say what.

Seated on the other side of the table, tienne at last said:

"To-morrow work begins again at the Voreux. The Belgians have come with
little Ngrel."

"Yes, they landed them at nightfall," muttered Rasseneur, who remained
standing. "As long as they don't kill each other after all!"

Then raising his voice:

"No, you know, I don't want to begin our disputes over again, but this
will end badly if you hold out any longer. Why, your story is just like
that of your International. I met Pluchart the day before yesterday, at
Lille, where I went on business. It's going wrong, that machine of his."

He gave details. The association, after having conquered the workers
of the whole world, in an outburst of propaganda which had left the
middle class still shuddering, was now being devoured and slowly
destroyed by an internal struggle between vanities and ambitions.
Since the anarchists had triumphed in it, chasing out the earlier
evolutionists, everything was breaking up; the original aim, the reform
of the wage-system, was lost in the midst of the squabbling of sects;
the scientific framework was disorganized by the hatred of discipline.
And already it was possible to foresee the final miscarriage of this
general revolt which for a moment had threatened to carry away in a
breath the old rotten society.

"Pluchart is ill over it," Rasseneur went on. "And he has no voice at
all now. All the same, he talks on in spite of everything and wants to
go to Paris. And he told me three times over that our strike was done
for."

tienne with his eyes on the ground let him talk on without
interruption. The evening before he had chatted with some mates, and he
felt that breaths of spite and suspicion were passing over him, those
first breaths of unpopularity which forerun defeat. And he remained
gloomy, he would not confess dejection in the presence of a man who had
foretold to him that the crowd would hoot him in his turn on the day
when they had to avenge themselves for a miscalculation.

"No doubt the strike is done for, I know that as well as Pluchart," he
said. "But we foresaw that. We accepted this strike against our wishes,
we didn't count on finishing up with the Company. Only one gets carried
away, one begins to expect things, and when it turns out badly one
forgets that one ought to have expected that, instead of lamenting and
quarrelling as if it were a catastrophe tumbled down from heaven."

"Then if you think the game's lost," asked Rasseneur, "why don't you
make the mates listen to reason?"

The young man looked at him fixedly.

"Listen! enough of this. You have your ideas, I have mine. I came in
here to show you that I feel esteem for you in spite of everything.
But I still think that if we come to grief over this trouble, our
starved carcasses will do more for the people's cause than all your
common-sense politics. Ah! if one of those bloody soldiers would just
put a bullet in my heart, that would be a fine way of ending!"

His eyes were moist, as in this cry there broke out the secret desire
of the vanquished, the refuge in which he desired to lose his torment
for ever.

"Well said!" declared Madame Rasseneur, casting on her husband a look
which was full of all the contempt of her radical opinions.

Souvarine, with a vague gaze, feeling about with his nervous hands, did
not appear to hear. His fair girlish face, with the thin nose and small
pointed teeth, seemed to be growing savage in some mystic dream full
of bloody visions. And he began to dream aloud, replying to a remark
of Rasseneur's about the International which had been let fall in the
course of the conversation.

"They are all cowards; there is only one man who can make their machine
into a terrible instrument of destruction. It requires will, and none
of them have will; and that's why the revolution will miscarry once
more."

He went on in a voice of disgust, lamenting the imbecility of men,
while the other two were disturbed by these somnambulistic confidences
made in the darkness. In Russia there was nothing going on well, and
he was in despair over the news he had received. His old companions
were all turning to the politicians; the famous Nihilists who made
Europe tremble--sons of village priests, of the lower middle class,
of tradesmen--could not rise above the idea of national liberation,
and seemed to believe that the world would be delivered--when they had
killed their despot. As soon as he spoke to them of razing society
to the ground like a ripe harvest--as soon as he even pronounced the
infantile word "republic"--he felt that he was misunderstood and a
disturber, henceforth unclassed, enrolled among the lost leaders of
cosmopolitan revolution. His patriotic heart struggled, however, and it
was with painful bitterness that he repeated his favourite expression:

"Foolery! They'll never get out of it with their foolery."

Then, lowering his voice still more, in a few bitter words he described
his old dream of fraternity. He had renounced his rank and his fortune;
he had gone among workmen, only in the hope of seeing at last the
foundation of a new society of labour in common. All the sous in his
pockets had long gone to the urchins of the settlement; he had been
as tender as a brother with the colliers, smiling at their suspicion,
winning them over by his quiet workmanlike ways and his dislike of
chattering. But decidedly the fusion had not taken place; he remained
a stranger, with his contempt of all bonds, his desire to keep himself
free of all petty vanities and enjoyments. And since this morning
he had been especially exasperated by reading an incident in the
newspapers.

His voice changed, his eyes grew bright, he fixed them on tienne,
directly addressing him:

"Now, do you understand that? These hatworkers at Marseilles who have
won the great lottery prize of a hundred thousand francs have gone off
at once and invested it, declaring that they are going to live without
doing anything! Yes, that is your idea, all of you French workmen; you
want to unearth a treasure in order to devour it alone afterwards in
some lazy, selfish corner. You may cry out as much as you like against
the rich, you haven't got courage enough to give back to the poor the
money that luck brings you. You will never be worthy of happiness as
long as you own anything, and your hatred of the bourgeois proceeds
solely from an angry desire to be bourgeois yourselves in their place."

Rasseneur burst out laughing. The idea that the two Marseilles workmen
ought to renounce the big prize seemed to him absurd. But Souvarine
grew pale; his face changed and became terrible in one of those
religious rages which exterminate nations. He cried:

"You will all be mown down, overthrown, cast on the dung-heap.
Someone will be born who will annihilate your race of cowards and
pleasure-seekers. And look here! you see my hands; if my hands were
able they would take up the earth, like that, and shake it until it was
smashed to fragments, and you were all buried beneath the rubbish."

"Well said," declared Madame Rasseneur, with her polite and convinced
air.

There was silence again. Then tienne spoke once more of the Borinage
men. He questioned Souvarine concerning the steps that had been taken
at the Voreux. But the engine-man was still preoccupied, and scarcely
replied. He only knew that cartridges would be distributed to the
soldiers who were guarding the pit; and the nervous restlessness of his
fingers over his knees increased to such an extent that, at last, he
became conscious of what was lacking--the soft and soothing fur of the
tame rabbit.

"Where is Poland, then?" he asked.

The innkeeper laughed again as he looked at his wife. After an awkward
silence he made up his mind:

"Poland? She is in the pot."

Since her adventure with Jeanlin, the pregnant rabbit, no doubt
wounded, had only brought forth dead young ones; and to avoid feeding a
useless mouth they had resigned themselves that very day to serve her
up with potatoes.

"Yes, you ate one of her legs this evening. Eh! You licked your fingers
after it!"

Souvarine had not understood at first. Then he became very pale, and
his face contracted with nausea; while, in spite of his stoicism, two
large tears were swelling beneath his eyelids.

But no one had time to notice this emotion, for the door had opened
roughly and Chaval had appeared, pushing Catherine before him.
After having made himself drunk with beer and bluster in all the
public-houses of Montsou, the idea had occurred to him to go to the
Avantage to show his old friends that he was not afraid. As he came in,
he said to his mistress:

"By God! I tell you you shall drink a glass in here; I'll break the
jaws of the first man who looks askance at me!"

Catherine, moved at the sight of tienne, had become very pale. When
Chaval in his turn perceived him, he grinned in his evil fashion.

"Two glasses, Madame Rasseneur! We're wetting the new start of work."

Without a word she poured out, as a woman who never refused her beer to
any one. There was silence, and neither the landlord nor the two others
stirred from their places.

"I know people who've said that I was a spy," Chaval went on
swaggeringly, "and I'm waiting for them just to say it again to my
face, so that we can have a bit of explanation."

No one replied, and the men turned their heads and gazed vaguely at the
walls.

"There are some who sham, and there are some who don't sham," he went
on louder. "I've nothing to hide. I've left Deneulin's dirty shop,
and to-morrow I'm going down to the Voreux with a dozen Belgians, who
have been given me to lead because I'm held in esteem; and if any one
doesn't like that, he can just say so, and we'll talk it over."

Then, as the same contemptuous silence greeted his provocations, he
turned furiously on Catherine.

"Will you drink, by God? Drink with me to the confusion of all the
dirty beasts who refuse to work."

She drank, but with so trembling a hand that the two glasses struck
together with a tinkling sound. He had now pulled out of his pocket a
handful of silver, which he exhibited with drunken ostentation, saying
that he had earned that with his sweat, and that he defied the shammers
to show ten sous. The attitude of his mates exasperated him, and he
began to come to direct insults.

"Then it is at night that the moles come out? The police have to go to
sleep before we meet the brigands."

tienne had risen, very calm and resolute.

"Listen! You annoy me. Yes, you are a spy; your money still stinks of
some treachery. You've sold yourself, and it disgusts me to touch your
skin. No matter; I'm your man. It is quite time that one of us did for
the other."

Chaval clenched his fists.

"Come along, then, cowardly dog! I must call you so to warm you up.
You all alone--I'm quite willing; and you shall pay for all the bloody
tricks that have been played on me."

With suppliant arms Catherine advanced between them. But they had no
need to repel her; she felt the necessity of the battle, and slowly
drew back of her own accord. Standing against the wall, she remained
silent, so paralysed with anguish that she no longer shivered, her
large eyes gazing at these two men who were going to kill each other
over her.

Madame Rasseneur simply removed the glasses from the counter for fear
that they might be broken. Then she sat down again on the bench,
without showing any improper curiosity. But two old mates could
not be left to murder each other like this. Rasseneur persisted in
interfering, and Souvarine had to take him by the shoulder and lead him
back to the table, saying:

"It doesn't concern you. There is one of them too many, and the
strongest must live."

Without waiting for the attack, Chaval's fists were already dealing
blows at space. He was the taller of the two, and his blows swung about
aiming at the face, with furious cutting movements of both arms one
after the other, as though he were handling a couple of sabres. And he
went on talking, playing to the gallery with volleys of abuse, which
served to excite him.

"Ah! you damned devil, I'll have your nose! I'll do for your bloody
nose! Just let me get at your chops, you whore's looking-glass;
I'll make a hash for the bloody swine, and then we shall see if the
strumpets will run after you!"

In silence, and with clenched teeth, tienne gathered up his small
figure, according to the rules of the game, protecting his chest and
face by both fists; and he watched and let them fly like springs
released, with terrible straight blows.

At first they did each other little damage. The whirling and blustering
blows of the one, the cool watchfulness of the other, prolonged the
struggle. A chair was overthrown; their heavy boots crushed the white
sand scattered on the floor. But at last they were out of breath, their
panting respiration was heard, while their faces became red and swollen
as from an interior fire which flamed out from the clear holes of their
eyes.

"Played!" yelled Chaval; "trumps on your carcass!"

In fact his fist, working like a flail, had struck his adversary's
shoulder. tienne restrained a groan of pain and the only sound that
was heard was the dull bruising of the muscles. tienne replied with
a straight blow to Chaval's chest, which would have knocked him out,
had he had not saved himself by one of his constant goat-like leaps.
The blow, however, caught him on the left flank with such effect that
he tottered, momentarily winded. He became furious on feeling his arm
grow limp with pain, and kicked out like a wild beast, aiming at his
adversary's belly with his heel.

"Have at your guts!" he stammered in a choked voice. "I'll pull them
out and unwind them for you!"

tienne avoided the blow, so indignant at this infraction of the laws
of fair fighting that he broke silence.

"Hold your tongue, brute! And no feet, by God! or I take a chair and
bash you with it!"

Then the struggle became serious. Rasseneur was disgusted, and would
again have interfered, but a severe look from his wife held him back:
had not two customers a right to settle an affair in the house?
He simply placed himself before the fireplace, for fear lest they
should tumble over into it. Souvarine, in his quiet way, had rolled a
cigarette, but he forgot to light it. Catherine was motionless against
the wall; only her hands had unconsciously risen to her waist, and with
constant fidgeting movements were twisting and tearing at the stuff of
her dress. She was striving as hard as possible not to cry out, and so,
perhaps, kill one of them by declaring her preference; but she was,
too, so distracted that she did not even know which she preferred.

Chaval, who was bathed in sweat and striking at random, soon became
exhausted. In spite of his anger, tienne continued to cover himself,
parrying nearly all the blows, a few of which grazed him. His ear was
split, a finger nail had torn away a piece of his neck, and this so
smarted that he swore in his turn as he drove out one of his terrible
straight blows. Once more Chaval saved his chest by a leap, but he had
lowered himself, and the fist reached his face, smashing his nose and
crushing one eye. Immediately a jet of blood came from his nostrils,
and his eye became swollen and bluish. Blinded by this red flood, and
dazed by the shock to his skull, the wretch was beating the air with
his arms at random, when another blow, striking him at last full in the
chest, finished him. There was a crunching sound; he fell on his back
with a heavy thud, as when a sack of plaster is emptied.

tienne waited.

"Get up! if you want some more, we'll begin again."

Without replying, Chaval, after a few minutes' stupefaction, moved
on the ground and stretched his limbs. He picked himself up with
difficulty, resting for a moment curled up on his knees, doing
something with his hand in the bottom of his pocket which could not be
observed. Then, when he was up, he rushed forward again, his throat
swelling with a savage yell.

But Catherine had seen; and in spite of herself a loud cry came from
her heart, astonishing her like the avowal of a preference she had
herself been ignorant of:

"Take care! he's got his knife!"

tienne had only time to parry the first blow with his arm. His woollen
jacket was cut by the thick blade, one of those blades fastened by a
copper ferrule into a boxwood handle. He had already seized Chaval's
wrist, and a terrible struggle began; for he felt that he would be lost
if he let go, while the other shook his arm in the effort to free it
and strike. The weapon was gradually lowered as their stiffened limbs
grew fatigued. tienne twice felt the cold sensation of the steel
against his skin; and he had to make a supreme effort, so crushing the
other's wrist that the knife slipped from his hand. Both of them had
fallen to the earth, and it was tienne who snatched it up, brandishing
it in his turn. He held Chaval down beneath his knee and threatened to
slit his throat open.

"Ah, traitor! by God! you've got it coming to you now!"

He felt an awful voice within, deafening him. It arose from his bowels
and was beating in his head like a hammer, a sudden mania of murder, a
need to taste blood. Never before had the crisis so shaken him. He was
not drunk, however, and he struggled against the hereditary disease
with the despairing shudder of a man who is mad with lust and struggles
on the verge of rape. At last he conquered himself; he threw the knife
behind him, stammering in a hoarse voice:

"Get up--off you go!"

This time Rasseneur had rushed forward, but without quite daring to
venture between them, for fear of catching a nasty blow. He did not
want any one to be murdered in his house, and was so angry that his
wife, sitting erect at the counter, remarked to him that he always
cried out too soon. Souvarine, who had nearly caught the knife in his
legs, decided to light his cigarette. Was it, then, all over? Catherine
was looking on stupidly at the two men, who were unexpectedly both
living.

"Off you go!" repeated tienne. "Off you go, or I'll do for you!"

Chaval arose, and with the back of his hand wiped away the blood which
continued to flow from his nose; with jaw smeared red and bruised
eye, he went away trailing his feet, furious at his defeat. Catherine
mechanically followed him. Then he turned round, and his hatred broke
out in a flood of filth.

"No, no! since you want him, sleep with him, dirty jade! and don't put
your bloody feet in my place again if you value your skin!"

He violently banged the door. There was deep silence in the warm room,
the low crackling of the coal was alone heard. On the ground there only
remained the overturned chair and a rain of blood which the sand on the
floor was drinking up.




CHAPTER IV


When they came out of Rasseneur's, tienne and Catherine walked on in
silence. The thaw was beginning, a slow cold thaw which stained the
snow without melting it. In the livid sky a full moon could be faintly
seen behind great clouds, black rags driven furiously by a tempestuous
wind far above; and on the earth no breath was stirring, nothing could
be heard but drippings from the roofs, the falling of white lumps with
a soft thud.

tienne was embarrassed by this woman who had been given to him, and
in his disquiet he could find nothing to say. The idea of taking her
with him to hide at Rquillart seemed absurd. He had proposed to lead
her back to the settlement, to her parents' house, but she had refused
in terror. No, no! anything rather than be a burden on them once more
after having behaved so badly to them! And neither of them spoke any
more; they tramped on at random through the roads which were becoming
rivers of mud. At first they went down towards the Voreux; then they
turned to the right and passed between the pit-bank and the canal.

"But you'll have to sleep somewhere," he said at last. "Now, if I only
had a room, I could easily take you----"

But a curious spasm of timidity interrupted him. The past came back
to him, their old longings for each other, and the delicacies and the
shames which had prevented them from coming together. Did he still
desire her, that he felt so troubled, gradually warmed at the heart by
a fresh longing? The recollection of the blows she had dealt him at
Gaston-Marie now attracted him instead of filling him with spite. And
he was surprised; the idea of taking her to Rquillart was becoming
quite natural and easy to execute.

"Now, come, decide; where would you like me to take you? You must hate
me very much to refuse to come with me!"

She was following him slowly, delayed by the painful slipping of her
sabots into the ruts; and without raising her head she murmured:

"I have enough trouble, good God! don't give me any more. What good
would it do us, what you ask, now that I have a lover and you have a
woman yourself?"

She meant Mouquette. She believed that he still went with this girl, as
the rumour ran for the last fortnight; and when he swore to her that it
was not so she shook her head, for she remembered the evening when she
had seen them eagerly kissing each other.

"Isn't it a pity, all this nonsense?" he whispered, stopping. "We might
understand each other so well."

She shuddered slightly and replied:

"Never mind, you've nothing to be sorry for; you don't lose much. If
you knew what a trumpery thing I am--no bigger than two ha'porth of
butter, so ill made that I shall never become a woman, sure enough!"

And she went on freely accusing herself, as though the long delay of
her puberty had been her own fault. In spite of the man whom she had
had, this lessened her, placed her among the urchins. One has some
excuse, at any rate, when one can produce a child.

"My poor little one!" said tienne, with deep pity, in a very low voice.

They were at the foot of the pit-bank, hidden in the shadow of the
enormous pile. An inky cloud was just then passing over the moon;
they could no longer even distinguish their faces, their breaths
were mingled, their lips were seeking each other for that kiss which
had tormented them with desire for months. But suddenly the moon
reappeared, and they saw the sentinel above them, at the top of the
rocks white with light, standing out erect on the Voreux. And before
they had kissed an emotion of modesty separated them, that old modesty
in which there was something of anger, a vague repugnance, and much
friendship. They set out again heavily, up to their ankles in mud.

"Then it's settled. You don't want to have anything to do with me?"
asked tienne.

"No," she said. "You after Chaval; and after you another, eh? No, that
disgusts me; it doesn't give me any pleasure. What's the use of doing
it?"

They were silent, and walked some hundred paces without exchanging a
word.

"But, anyhow, do you know where to go to?" he said again. "I can't
leave you out in a night like this."

She replied, simply:

"I'm going back. Chaval is my man. I have nowhere else to sleep but
with him."

"But he will beat you to death."

There was silence again. She had shrugged her shoulders in resignation.
He would beat her, and when he was tired of beating her he would stop.
Was not that better than to roam the streets like a vagabond? Then she
was used to blows; she said, to console herself, that eight out of ten
girls were no better off than she was. If her lover married her some
day it would, all the same, be very nice of him.

tienne and Catherine were moving mechanically towards Montsou, and
as they came nearer their silences grew longer. It was as though they
had never before been together. He could find no argument to convince
her, in spite of the deep vexation which he felt at seeing her go back
to Chaval. His heart was breaking, he had nothing better to offer than
an existence of wretchedness and flight, a night with no to-morrow
should a soldier's bullet go through his head. Perhaps, after all, it
was wiser to suffer what he was suffering rather than risk a fresh
suffering. So he led her back to her lover's, with sunken head, and
made no protest when she stopped him on the main road, at the corner of
the Yards, twenty metres from the Estaminet Piquette, saying:

"Don't come any farther. If he sees you it will only make things worse."

Eleven o'clock struck at the church. The estaminet was closed, but
gleams came through the cracks.

"Good-bye," she murmured.

She had given him her hand; he kept it, and she had to draw it away
painfully, with a slow effort, to leave him. Without turning her head,
she went in through the little latched door. But he did not turn away,
standing at the same place with his eyes on the house, anxious as to
what was passing within. He listened, trembling lest he should hear the
cries of a beaten woman. The house remained black and silent; he only
saw a light appear at a first-floor window, and as this window opened,
and he recognized the thin shadow that was leaning over the road, he
came near.

Catherine then whispered very low:

"He's not come back. I'm going to bed. Please go away."

tienne went off. The thaw was increasing; a regular shower was falling
from the roofs, a moist sweat flowed down the walls, the palings, the
whole confused mass of this industrial district lost in night. At
first he turned towards Rquillart, sick with fatigue and sadness,
having no other desire except to disappear under the earth and to be
annihilated there. Then the idea of the Voreux occurred to him again.
He thought of the Belgian workmen who were going down, of his mates at
the settlement, exasperated against the soldiers and resolved not to
tolerate strangers in their pit. And he passed again along the canal
through the puddles of melted snow.

As he stood once more near the pit-bank the moon was shining brightly.
He raised his eyes and gazed at the sky. The clouds were galloping by,
whipped on by the strong wind which was blowing up there; but they were
growing white, and ravelling out thinly with the misty transparency
of troubled water over the moon's face. They succeeded each other so
rapidly that the moon, veiled at moments, constantly reappeared in
limpid clearness.

With gaze full of this pure brightness, tienne was lowering his head,
when a spectacle on the summit of the pit-bank attracted his attention.
The sentinel, stiffened by cold, was walking up and down, taking
twenty-five paces towards Marchiennes, and then returning towards
Montsou. The white glitter of his bayonet could be seen above his black
silhouette, which stood out clearly against the pale sky. But what
interested the young man, behind the cabin where Bonnemort used to take
shelter on tempestuous nights, was a moving shadow--a crouching beast
in ambush--which he immediately recognized as Jeanlin, with his long
flexible spine like a marten's. The sentinel could not see him. That
brigand of a child was certainly preparing some practical joke, for he
was still furious against the soldiers, and asking when they were going
to be freed from these murderers who had been sent here with guns to
kill people.

For a moment tienne thought of calling him to prevent the execution of
some stupid trick. The moon was hidden. He had seen him draw himself
up ready to spring; but the moon reappeared, and the child remained
crouching. At every turn the sentinel came as far as the cabin, then
turned his back and walked in the opposite direction. And suddenly, as
a cloud threw its shadow, Jeanlin leapt on to the soldier's shoulders
with the great bound of a wild cat, and gripping him with his claws
buried his large open knife in his throat. The horse-hair collar
resisted; he had to apply both hands to the handle and hang on with
all the weight of his body. He had often bled fowls which he had found
behind farms. It was so rapid that there was only a stifled cry in the
night, while the musket fell with the sound of old iron. Already the
moon was shining again.

Motionless with stupor, tienne was still gazing. A shout had been
choked in his chest. Above, the pit-bank was vacant; no shadow was
any longer visible against the wild flight of clouds. He ran up and
found Jeanlin on all fours before the corpse, which was lying back
with extended arms. Beneath the limpid light the red trousers and grey
overcoat contrasted harshly with the snow. Not a drop of blood had
flowed, the knife was still in the throat up to the handle. With a
furious, unreasoning blow of the fist he knocked the child down beside
the body.

"What have you done that for?" he stammered wildly.

Jeanlin picked himself up and rested on his hands, with a feline
movement of his thin spine; his large ears, his green eyes, his
prominent jaws were quivering and aflame with the shock of his deadly
blow.

"By God! why have you done this?"

"I don't know; I wanted to."

He persisted in this reply. For three days he had wanted to. It
tormented him, it made his head ache behind his ears, because he
thought about it so much. Need one be so particular with these damned
soldiers who were worrying the colliers in their own homes? Of the
violent speeches he had heard in the forest, the cries of destruction
and death shouted among the pits, five or six words had remained with
him, and these he repeated like a street urchin playing at revolution.
And he knew no more; no one had urged him on, it had come to him of
itself, just as the desire to steal onions from a field came to him.

Startled at this obscure growth of crime in the recesses of this
childish brain, tienne again pushed him away with a kick, like an
unconscious animal. He trembled lest the guard at the Voreux had heard
the sentinel's stifled cry, and looked towards the pit every time the
moon was uncovered. But nothing stirred, and he bent down, felt the
hands that were gradually becoming icy, and listened to the heart,
which had stopped beneath the overcoat. Only the bone handle of the
knife could be seen with the motto on it, the simple word "Amour,"
engraved in black letters.

His eyes went from the throat to the face. Suddenly he recognized the
little soldier; it was Jules, the recruit with whom he had talked one
morning. And deep pity came over him in front of this fair gentle face,
marked with freckles. The blue eyes, wide open, were gazing at the sky
with that fixed gaze with which he had before seen him searching the
horizon for the country of his birth. Where was it, that Plogof which
had appeared to him beneath the dazzling sun? Over there, over there!
The sea was moaning afar on this tempestuous night. That wind passing
above had perhaps swept over the moors. Two women perhaps were standing
there, the mother and the sister, clutching their wind-blown coifs,
gazing as if they could see what was now happening to the little fellow
through the leagues which separated them. They would always wait for
him now. What an abominable thing it is for poor devils to kill each
other for the sake of the rich!

But this corpse had to be disposed of. tienne at first thought of
throwing it into the canal, but was deterred from this by the certainty
that it would be found there. His anxiety became extreme, every minute
was of importance; what decision should he take? He had a sudden
inspiration: if he could carry the body as far as Rquillart, he would
be able to bury it there for ever.

"Come here," he said to Jeanlin.

The child was suspicious.

"No, you want to beat me. And then I have business. Good night."

In fact, he had given a rendezvous to Bbert and Lydie in a
hiding-place, a hole arranged under the wood supply at the Voreux. It
had been arranged to sleep out, so as to be there if the Belgians'
bones were to be broken by stoning when they went down the pit.

"Listen!" repeated tienne. "Come here, or I shall call the soldiers,
who will cut your head off."

And as Jeanlin was making up his mind, he rolled his handkerchief, and
bound the soldier's neck tightly, without drawing out the knife, so as
to prevent the blood from flowing. The snow was melting; on the soil
there was neither a red patch nor the footmarks of a struggle.

"Take the legs!"

Jeanlin took the legs, while tienne seized the shoulders, after having
fastened the gun behind his back, and then they both slowly descended
the pit-bank, trying to avoid rolling any rocks down. Fortunately the
moon was hidden. But as they passed along the canal it reappeared
brightly, and it was a miracle that the guard did not see them.
Silently they hastened on, hindered by the swinging of the corpse, and
obliged to place it on the ground every hundred metres. At the corner
of the Rquillart lane they heard a sound which froze them with terror,
and they only had time to hide behind a wall to avoid a patrol. Farther
on, a man came across them, but he was drunk, and moved away abusing
them. At last they reached the old pit, bathed in perspiration, and so
exhausted that their teeth were chattering.

tienne had guessed that it would not be easy to get the soldier down
the ladder shaft. It was an awful task. First of all Jeanlin, standing
above, had to let the body slide down, while tienne, hanging on to
the bushes, had to accompany it to enable it to pass the first two
ladders where the rungs were broken. Afterwards, at every ladder, he
had to perform the same manoeuvre over again, going down first, then
receiving the body in his arms; and he had thus, down thirty ladders,
two hundred and ten metres, to feel it constantly falling over him.
The gun scraped his spine; he had not allowed the child to go for the
candle-end, which he preserved avariciously. What was the use? The
light would only embarrass them in this narrow tube. When they arrived
at the pit-eye, however, out of breath, he sent the youngster for the
candle. He then sat down and waited for him in the darkness, near the
body, with heart beating violently. As soon as Jeanlin reappeared with
the light, tienne consulted with him, for the child had explored these
old workings, even to the cracks through which men could not pass.
They set out again, dragging the dead body for nearly a kilometre,
through a maze of ruinous galleries. At last the roof became low,
and they found themselves kneeling beneath a sandy rock supported by
half-broken planks. It was a sort of long chest in which they laid the
little soldier as in a coffin; they placed his gun by his side; then
with vigorous blows of their heels they broke the timber at the risk
of being buried themselves. Immediately the rock gave way, and they
scarcely had time to crawl back on their elbows and knees. When tienne
returned, seized by the desire to look once more, the roof was still
falling in, slowly crushing the body beneath its enormous weight. And
then there was nothing more left, nothing but the vast mass of the
earth.

Jeanlin, having returned to his own corner, his little cavern of
villainy, was stretching himself out on the hay, overcome by weariness,
and murmuring:

"Heigho! the brats must wait for me; I'm going to have an hour's sleep."

tienne had blown out the candle, of which there was only a small end
left. He also was worn out, but he was not sleepy; painful nightmare
thoughts were beating like hammers in his skull. Only one at last
remained, torturing him and fatiguing him with a question to which he
could not reply: Why had he not struck Chaval when he held him beneath
the knife? and why had this child just killed a soldier whose very
name he did not know? It shook his revolutionary beliefs, the courage
to kill, the right to kill. Was he, then, a coward? In the hay the
child had begun snoring, the snoring of a drunken man, as if he were
sleeping off the intoxication of his murder. tienne was disgusted and
irritated; it hurt him to know that the boy was there and to hear him.
Suddenly he started, a breath of fear passed over his face. A light
rustling, a sob, seemed to him to have come out of the depths of the
earth. The image of the little soldier, lying over there with his gun
beneath the rocks, froze his back and made his hair stand up. It was
idiotic, the whole mine seemed to be filled with voices; he had to
light the candle again, and only grew calm on seeing the emptiness of
the galleries by this pale light.

For another quarter of an hour he reflected, still absorbed in the
same struggle, his eyes fixed on the burning wick. But there was a
spluttering, the wick was going out, and everything fell back into
darkness. He shuddered again; he could have boxed Jeanlin's ears, to
keep him from snoring so loudly. The neighbourhood of the child became
so unbearable that he escaped, tormented by the need for fresh air,
hastening through the galleries and up the passage, as though he could
hear a shadow, panting, at his heels.

Up above, in the midst of the ruins of Rquillart, tienne was at last
able to breathe freely. Since he dared not kill, it was for him to die;
and this idea of death, which had already touched him, came again and
fixed itself in his head, as a last hope. To die bravely, to die for
the revolution, that would end everything, would settle his account,
good or bad, and prevent him from thinking more. If the men attacked
the Borains, he would be in the first rank, and would have a good
chance of getting a bad blow. It was with firmer step that he returned
to prowl around the Voreux. Two o'clock struck, and the loud noise
of voices was coming from the captains' room, where the guards who
watched over the pit were posted. The disappearance of the sentinel had
overcome the guards with surprise; they had gone to arouse the captain,
and after a careful examination of the place, they concluded that it
must be a case of desertion. Hiding in the shade, tienne recollected
this republican captain of whom the little soldier had spoken. Who
knows if he might not be persuaded to pass over to the people's side!
The troop would raise their rifles, and that would be the signal for
a massacre of the bourgeois. A new dream took possession of him; he
thought no more of dying, but remained for hours with his feet in the
mud, and a drizzle from the thaw falling on his shoulders, filled by
the feverish hope that victory was still possible.

Up to five o'clock he watched for the Borains. Then he perceived
that the Company had cunningly arranged that they should sleep at
the Voreux. The descent had begun, and the few strikers from the
Deux-Cent-Quarante settlement who had been posted as scouts had not yet
warned their mates. It was he who told them of the trick, and they set
out running, while he waited behind the pit-bank, on the towing-path.
Six o'clock struck, and the earthy sky was growing pale and lighting up
with a reddish dawn, when the Abb Ranvier came along a path, holding
up his cassock above his thin legs. Every Monday he went to say an
early mass at a convent chapel on the other side of the pit.

"Good morning, my friend," he shouted in a loud voice, after staring at
the young man with his flaming eyes.

But tienne did not reply. Far away between the Voreux platforms he had
just seen a woman pass, and he rushed forward anxiously, for he thought
he recognized Catherine. Since midnight, Catherine had been walking
about the thawing roads. Chaval, on coming back and finding her in bed,
had knocked her out with a blow. He shouted to her to go at once by the
door if she did not wish to go by the window; and scarcely dressed,
in tears, and bruised by kicks in her legs, she had been obliged to
go down, pushed outside by a final thrust. This sudden separation
dazed her, and she sat down on a stone, looking up at the house, still
expecting that he would call her back. It was not possible; he would
surely look for her and tell her to come back when he saw her thus
shivering and abandoned, with no one to take her in.

At the end of two hours she made up her mind, dying of cold and as
motionless as a dog thrown into the street. She left Montsou, then
retraced her steps, but dared neither to call from the pathway nor to
knock at the door. At last she went off by the main road to the right
with the idea of going to the settlement, to her parents' house. But
when she reached it she was seized by such shame that she rushed away
along the gardens for fear of being recognized by someone, in spite of
the heavy sleep which weighed on all eyes behind the closed shutters.
And after that she wandered about, frightened at the slightest noise,
trembling lest she should be seized and led away as a strumpet to
that house at Marchiennes, the threat of which had haunted her like
nightmare for months. Twice she stumbled against the Voreux, but
terrified at the loud voices of the guard, she ran away out of breath,
looking behind her to see if she was being pursued. The Rquillart lane
was always full of drunken men; she went back to it, however, with the
vague hope of meeting there him she had repelled a few hours earlier.

Chaval had to go down that morning, and this thought brought Catherine
again towards the pit, though she felt that it would be useless to
speak to him: all was over between them. There was no work going on
at Jean-Bart, and he had sworn to kill her if she worked again at the
Voreux, where he feared that she would compromise him. So what was to
be done?--to go elsewhere, to die of hunger, to yield beneath the blows
of every man who might pass? She dragged herself along, tottering amid
the ruts, with aching legs and mud up to her spine. The thaw had now
filled the streets with a flood of mire. She waded through it, still
walking, not daring to look for a stone to sit on.

Day appeared. Catherine had just recognized the back of Chaval, who was
cautiously going round the pit-bank, when she noticed Lydie and Bbert
putting their noses out of their hiding-place beneath the wood supply.
They had passed the night there in ambush, without going home, since
Jeanlin's order was to await him; and while this latter was sleeping
off the drunkenness of his murder at Rquillart, the two children were
lying in each other's arms to keep warm. The wind blew between the
planks of chestnut and oak, and they rolled themselves up as in some
wood-cutter's abandoned hut. Lydie did not dare to speak aloud the
sufferings of a small beaten woman, any more than Bbert found courage
to complain of the captain's blows which made his cheeks swell; but
the captain was really abusing his power, risking their bones in mad
marauding expeditions while refusing to share the booty. Their hearts
rose in revolt, and they had at last embraced each other in spite of
his orders, careless of that box of the ears from the invisible with
which he had threatened them. It never came, so they went on kissing
each other softly, with no idea of anything else, putting into that
caress the passion they had long struggled against--the whole of their
martyred and tender natures. All night through they had thus kept each
other warm, so happy, at the bottom of this secret hole, that they
could not remember that they had ever been so happy before--not even on
St. Barbara's day, when they had eaten fritters and drunk wine.

The sudden sound of a bugle made Catherine start. She raised herself,
and saw the Voreux guards taking up their arms. tienne arrived
running; Bbert and Lydie jumped out of their hiding-place with a leap.
And over there, beneath the growing daylight, a band of men and women
were coming from the settlement, gesticulating wildly with anger.




CHAPTER V


All the entrances to the Voreux had been closed, and the sixty
soldiers, with grounded arms, were barring the only door left free,
that leading to the receiving-room by a narrow staircase into which
opened the captains' room and the shed. The men had been drawn up in
two lines against the brick wall, so that they could not be attacked
from behind.

At first the band of miners from the settlement kept at a distance.
They were some thirty at most, and talked together in a violent and
confused way.

Maheude, who had arrived first with dishevelled hair beneath a
handkerchief knotted on in haste, and having Estelle asleep in her
arms, repeated in feverish tones:

"Don't let any one in or any one out! Shut them all in there!"

Maheu approved, and just then Father Mouque arrived from Rquillart.
They wanted to prevent him from passing. But he protested; he said that
his horses ate their hay all the same, and cared precious little about
a revolution. Besides, there was a horse dead, and they were waiting
for him to draw it up. tienne freed the old groom, and the soldiers
allowed him to go to the shaft. A quarter of an hour later, as the band
of strikers, which had gradually enlarged, was becoming threatening,
a large door opened on the ground floor and some men appeared drawing
out the dead beast, a miserable mass of flesh still fastened in the
rope net; they left it in the midst of the puddles of melting snow. The
surprise was so great that no one prevented the men from returning and
barricading the door afresh. They all recognized the horse, with his
head bent back and stiff against the plank. Whispers ran around:

"It's Trompette, isn't it? it's Trompette."

It was, in fact, Trompette. Since his descent he had never become
acclimatized. He remained melancholy, with no taste for his task, as
though tortured by regret for the light. In vain Bataille, the _doyen_
of the mine, would rub him with his ribs in his friendly way,
softly biting his neck to impart to him a little of the resignation
gained in his ten years beneath the earth. These caresses increased his
melancholy, his skin quivered beneath the confidences of the comrade
who had grown old in darkness; and both of them, whenever they met and
snorted together, seemed to be grieving, the old one that he could no
longer remember, the young one that he could not forget. At the stable
they were neighbours at the manger, and lived with lowered heads,
breathing in each other's nostrils, exchanging a constant dream of
daylight, visions of green grass, of white roads, of infinite yellow
light. Then, when Trompette, bathed in sweat, lay in agony in his
litter, Bataille had smelled at him despairingly with short sniffs like
sobs. He felt that he was growing cold, the mine was taking from him
his last joy, that friend fallen from above, fresh with good odours,
who recalled to him his youth in the open air. And he had broken his
tether, neighing with fear, when he perceived that the other no longer
stirred.

Mouque had indeed warned the head captain a week ago. But much they
troubled about a sick horse at such time as this! These gentlemen did
not at all like moving the horses. Now, however, they had to make up
their minds to take him out. The evening before the groom had spent
an hour with two men tying up Trompette. They harnessed Bataille to
bring him to the shaft. The old horse slowly pulled, dragging his dead
comrade through so narrow a gallery that he could only shake himself at
the risk of taking the skin off. And he tossed his head, listening to
the grazing sound of the carcass as it went to the knacker's yard. At
the pit-eye, when he was unharnessed, he followed with his melancholy
eye the preparations for the ascent--the body pushed on to the
cross-bars over the sump, the net fastened beneath a cage. At last the
porters rang meat; he lifted his neck to see it go up, at first softly,
then at once lost in the darkness, flown up for ever to the top of that
black hole. And he remained with neck stretched out, his vague beast's
memory perhaps recalling the things of the earth. But it was all over;
he would never see his comrade again, and he himself would thus be
tied up in a pitiful bundle on the day when he would ascend up there.
His legs began to tremble, the fresh air which came from the distant
country choked him, and he seemed intoxicated when he went heavily back
to the stable.

At the surface the colliers stood gloomily before Trompette's carcass.
A woman said in a low voice:

"Another man; that may go down if it likes!"

But a new flood arrived from the settlement, and Levaque, who was at
the head followed by his wife and Bouteloup, shouted:

"Kill them, those Borains! No blacklegs here! Kill them! Kill them!"

All rushed forward, and tienne had to stop them. He went up to the
captain, a tall thin young man of scarcely twenty-eight years, with
a despairing, resolute face. He explained things to him; he tried to
win him over, watching the effect of his words. What was the good of
risking a useless massacre? Was not justice on the side of the miners?
They were all brothers, and they ought to understand one another.
When he came to use the world "republic" the captain made a nervous
movement; but he preserved his military stiffness, and said suddenly:

"Keep off! Do not force me to do my duty."

Three times over tienne tried again. Behind him his mates were
growling. The report ran that M. Hennebeau was at the pit, and they
talked of letting him down by the neck, to see if he would hew his
coal himself. But it was a false report; only Ngrel and Dansaert were
there. They both showed themselves for a moment at a window of the
receiving-room; the head captain stood in the background, rather out
of countenance since his adventure with Pierronne, while the engineer
bravely looked round on the crowd with his bright little eyes, smiling
with that sneering contempt in which he enveloped men and things
generally. Hooting arose, and they disappeared. And in their place
only Souvarine's pale face was seen. He was just then on duty; he had
not left his engine for a single day since the strike began, no longer
talking, more and more absorbed by a fixed idea, which seemed to be
shining like steel in the depths of his pale eyes.

"Keep off!" repeated the captain loudly. "I wish to hear nothing. My
orders are to guard the pit, and I shall guard it. And do not press on
to my men, or I shall know how to drive you back."

In spite of his firm voice, he was growing pale with increasing
anxiety, as the flood of miners continued to swell. He would be
relieved at midday; but fearing that he would not be able to hold out
until then, he had sent a trammer from the pit to Montsou to ask for
reinforcements.

Shouts had replied to him:

"Kill the blacklegs! Kill the Borains! We mean to be masters in our own
place!"

tienne drew back in despair. The end had come; there was nothing more
except to fight and to die. And he ceased to hold back his mates. The
mob moved up to the little troop. There were nearly four hundred of
them, and the people from the neighbouring settlements were all running
up. They all shouted the same cry. Maheu and Levaque said furiously to
the soldiers:

"Get off with you! We have nothing against you! Get off with you!"

"This doesn't concern you," said Maheude. "Let us attend to our own
affairs."

And from behind, the Levaque woman added, more violently:

"Must we eat you to get through? Just clear out of the bloody place!"

Even Lydie's shrill voice was heard. She had crammed herself in more
closely, with Bbert, and was saying, in a high voice:

"Oh, the pale-livered pigs!"

Catherine, a few paces off, was gazing and listening, stupefied by
new scenes of violence, into the midst of which ill luck seemed to be
always throwing her. Had she not suffered too much already? What fault
had she committed, then, that misfortune would never give her any rest?
The day before she had understood nothing of the fury of the strike;
she thought that when one has one's share of blows it is useless to
go and seek for more. And now her heart was swelling with hatred;
she remembered what tienne had often told her when they used to sit
up; she tried to hear what he was now saying to the soldiers. He was
treating them as mates; he reminded them that they also belonged to the
people, and that they ought to be on the side of the people against
those who took advantage of their wretchedness.

But a tremor ran through the crowd, and an old woman rushed up. It was
Mother Brul, terrible in her leanness, with her neck and arms in the
air, coming up at such a pace that the wisps of her grey hair blinded
her.

"Ah! by God! here I am," she stammered, out of breath; "that traitor
Pierron, who shut me up in the cellar!"

And without waiting she fell on the soldiers, her black mouth belching
abuse.

"Pack of scoundrels! dirty scum! ready to lick their masters' boots,
and only brave against poor people!"

Then the others joined her, and there were volleys of insults. A
few, indeed, cried: "Hurrah for the soldiers! to the shaft with the
officer!" but soon there was only one clamour: "Down with the red
breeches!" These men, who had listened quietly, with motionless mute
faces, to the fraternal appeals and the friendly attempts to win them
over, preserved the same stiff passivity beneath this hail of abuse.
Behind them the captain had drawn his sword, and as the crowd pressed
in on them more and more, threatening to crush them against the wall,
he ordered them to present bayonets. They obeyed, and a double row of
steel points was placed in front of the strikers' breasts.

"Ah! the bloody swine!" yelled Mother Brul, drawing back.

But already they were coming on again, in excited contempt of death.
The women were throwing themselves forward, Maheude and the Levaque
shouting:

"Kill us! Kill us, then! We want our rights!"

Levaque, at the risk of getting cut, had seized three bayonets in his
hands, shaking and pulling them in the effort to snatch them away. He
twisted them in the strength of his fury; while Bouteloup, standing
aside, and annoyed at having followed his mate, quietly watched him.

"Just come and look here," said Maheu; "just look a bit if you are good
chaps!"

And he opened his jacket and drew aside his shirt, showing his
naked breast, with his hairy skin tattooed by coal. He pressed on
the bayonets, compelling the soldiers to draw back, terrible in his
insolence and bravado. One of them had pricked him in the chest, and he
became like a madman, trying to make it enter deeper and to hear his
ribs crack.

"Cowards, you don't dare! There are ten thousand behind us. Yes, you
can kill us; there are ten thousand more of us to kill yet."

The position of the soldiers was becoming critical, for they had
received strict orders not to make use of their weapons until the last
extremity. And how were they to prevent these furious people from
impaling themselves? Besides, the space was getting less; they were now
pushed back against the wall, and it was impossible to draw further
back. Their little troop--a mere handful of men--opposed to the rising
flood of miners, still held its own, however, and calmly executed the
brief orders given by the captain. The latter, with keen eyes and
nervously compressed lips, only feared lest they should be carried away
by this abuse. Already a young sergeant, a tall lean fellow whose thin
moustache was bristling up, was blinking his eyes in a disquieting
manner. Near him an old soldier, with tanned skin and stripes won in
twenty campaigns, had grown pale when he saw his bayonet twisted like a
straw. Another, doubtless a recruit still smelling the fields, became
very red every time he heard himself called "scum" and "riff-raff."
And the violence did not cease, the outstretched fists, the abominable
words, the shovelfuls of accusations and threats which buffeted their
faces. It required all the force of order to keep them thus, with mute
faces, in the proud, gloomy silence of military discipline.

A collision seemed inevitable, when Captain Richomme appeared from
behind the troop with his benevolent white head, overwhelmed by
emotion. He spoke out loudly:

"By God! this is idiotic! such tomfoolery can't go on!"

And he threw himself between the bayonets and the miners.

"Mates, listen to me. You know that I am an old workman, and that I
have always been one of you. Well, by God! I promise you, that if
they're not just with you, I'm the man to go and say to the bosses how
things lie. But this is too much, it does no good at all to howl bad
names at these good fellows, and try and get your bellies ripped up."

They listened, hesitating. But up above, unfortunately, little Ngrel's
short profile reappeared. He feared, no doubt, that he would be accused
of sending a captain in place of venturing out himself; and he tried
to speak. But his voice was lost in the midst of so frightful a tumult
that he had to leave the window again, simply shrugging his shoulders.
Richomme then found it vain to entreat them in his own name, and to
repeat that the thing must be arranged between mates; they repelled
him, suspecting him. But he was obstinate and remained amongst them.

"By God! let them break my head as well as yours, for I don't leave you
while you are so foolish!"

tienne, whom he begged to help him in making them hear reason, made
a gesture of powerlessness. It was too late, there were now more than
five hundred of them. And besides the madmen who were rushing up to
chase away the Borains, some came out of inquisitiveness, or to joke
and amuse themselves over the battle. In the midst of one group, at
some distance, Zacharie and Philomne were looking on as at a theatre
so peacefully that they had brought their two children, Achille and
Dsire. Another stream was arriving from Rquillart, including Mouquet
and Mouquette. The former at once went on, grinning, to slap his friend
Zacharie on the back; while Mouquette, in a very excited condition,
rushed to the first rank of the evil-disposed.

Every minute, however, the captain looked down the Montsou road. The
desired reinforcements had not arrived, and his sixty men could hold
out no longer. At last it occurred to him to strike the imagination of
the crowd, and he ordered his men to load. The soldiers executed the
order, but the disturbance increased, the blustering, and the mockery.

"Ah! these shammers, they're going off to the target!" jeered the
women, the Brul, the Levaque, and the others.

Maheude, with her breast covered by the little body of Estelle, who was
awake and crying, came so near that the sergeant asked her what she was
going to do with that poor little brat.

"What the devil's that to do with you?" she replied. "Fire at it if you
dare!"

The men shook their heads with contempt. None believed that they would
fire on them.

"There are no balls in their cartridges," said Levaque.

"Are we Cossacks?" cried Maheu. "You don't fire against Frenchmen, by
God!"

Others said that when people had been through the Crimean campaign they
were not afraid of lead. And all continued to thrust themselves on to
the rifles. If firing had begun at this moment the crowd would have
been mown down.

In the front rank Mouquette was choking with fury, thinking that the
soldiers were going to gash the women's skins. She had spat out all
her coarse words at them, and could find no vulgarity low enough, when
suddenly, having nothing left but that mortal offence with which to
bombard the faces of the troop, she exhibited her backside. With both
hands she raised her skirts, bent her back, and expanded the enormous
rotundity.

"Here, that's for you! and it's a lot too clean, you dirty blackguards!"

She ducked and butted so that each might have his share, repeating
after each thrust:

"There's for the officer! there's for the sergeant! there's for the
soldiers!"

A tempest of laughter arose; Bbert and Lydie were in convulsions;
tienne himself, in spite of his sombre expectation, applauded this
insulting nudity. All of them, the banterers as well as the infuriated,
were now hooting the soldiers as though they had seen them stained by
a splash of filth; Catherine only, standing aside on some old timber,
remained silent with the blood at her heart, slowly carried away by the
hatred that was rising within her.

But a hustling took place. To calm the excitement of his men, the
captain decided to make prisoners. With a leap Mouquette escaped,
saving herself between the legs of her comrades. Three miners, Levaque
and two others, were seized among the more violent, and kept in sight
at the other end of the captains' room. Ngrel and Dansaert, above,
were shouting to the captain to come in and take refuge with them. He
refused; he felt that these buildings with their doors without locks
would be carried by assault, and that he would undergo the shame of
being disarmed. His little troop was already growling with impatience;
it was impossible to flee before these wretches in sabots. The sixty,
with their backs to the wall and their rifles loaded, again faced the
mob.

At first there was a recoil, followed by deep silence; the strikers
were astonished at this energetic stroke. Then a cry arose calling for
the prisoners, demanding their immediate release. Some voices said that
they were being murdered in there. And without any attempt at concerted
action, carried away by the same impulse, by the same desire for
revenge, they all ran to the piles of bricks which stood near, those
bricks for which the marly soil supplied the clay, and which were baked
on the spot. The children brought them one by one, and the women filled
their skirts with them. Every one soon had her ammunition at her feet,
and the battle of stones began.

It was Mother Brul who set to first. She broke the bricks on the
sharp edge of her knee, and with both hands she discharged the two
fragments. The Levaque woman was almost putting her shoulders out,
being so large and soft that she had to come near to get her aim, in
spite of Bouteloup's entreaties, and he dragged her back in the hope of
being able to lead her away now that her husband had been taken off.
They all grew excited, and Mouquette, tired of making herself bleed
by breaking the bricks on her overfat thighs, preferred to throw them
whole. Even the youngsters came into line, and Bbert showed Lydie how
the brick ought to be sent from under the elbow. It was a shower of
enormous hailstones, producing low thuds. And suddenly, in the midst
of these furies, Catherine was observed with her fists in the air also
brandishing half-bricks and throwing them with all the force of her
little arms. She could not have said why, she was suffocating, she was
dying of the desire to kill everybody. Would it not soon be done with,
this cursed life of misfortune? She had had enough of it, beaten and
driven away by her man, wandering about like a lost dog in the mud of
the roads, without being able to ask a crust from her father, who was
starving like herself. Things never seemed to get better; they were
getting worse ever since she could remember. And she broke the bricks
and threw them before her with the one idea of sweeping everything
away, her eyes so blinded that she could not even see whose jaws she
might be crushing.

tienne, who had remained in front of the soldiers, nearly had his
skull broken. His ear was grazed, and turning round he started when he
realized that the brick had come from Catherine's feverish hands; but
at the risk of being killed he remained where he was, gazing at her.
Many others also forgot themselves there, absorbed in the battle, with
empty hands. Mouquet criticized the blows as though he were looking
on at a game of _bouchon_. Oh, that was well struck! and that
other, no luck! He joked, and with his elbow pushed Zacharie, who was
squabbling with Philomne because he had boxed Achille's and Dsire's
ears, refusing to put them on his back so that they could see. There
were spectators crowded all along the road. And at the top of the slope
near the entrance to the settlement, old Bonnemort appeared, resting on
his stick, motionless against the rust-coloured sky.

As soon as the first bricks were thrown, Captain Richomme had again
placed himself between the soldiers and the miners. He was entreating
the one party, exhorting the other party, careless of danger, in such
despair that large tears were flowing from his eyes. It was impossible
to hear his words in the midst of the tumult; only his large grey
moustache could be seen moving.

But the hail of bricks came faster; the men were joining in, following
the example of the women.

Then Maheude noticed that Maheu was standing behind with empty hands
and sombre air.

"What's up with you?" she shouted. "Are you a coward? Are you going to
let your mates be carried off to prison? Ah! if only I hadn't got this
child, you should see!"

Estelle, who was clinging to her neck, screaming, prevented her from
joining Mother Brul and the others. And as her man did not seem to
hear, she kicked some bricks against his legs.

"By God! will you take that? Must I spit in your face before people to
get your spirits up?"

Becoming very red, he broke some bricks and threw them. She lashed
him on, dazing him, shouting behind him cries of death, stifling her
daughter against her breast with the spasm of her arms; and he still
moved forward until he was opposite the guns.

Beneath this shower of stones the little troop was disappearing.
Fortunately they struck too high, and the wall was riddled. What was
to be done? The idea of going in, of turning their backs for a moment
turned the captain's pale face purple; but it was no longer possible,
they would be torn to pieces at the least movement. A brick had just
broken the peak of his cap, drops of blood were running down his
forehead. Several of his men were wounded; and he felt that they were
losing self-control in that unbridled instinct of self-defence when
obedience to leaders ceases. The sergeant had uttered a "By God!" for
his left shoulder had nearly been put out, and his flesh bruised by a
shock like the blow of a washerwoman's beetle against linen. Grazed
twice over, the recruit had his thumb smashed, while his right knee was
grazed. Were they to let themselves be worried much longer? A stone
having bounded back and struck the old soldier with the stripes beneath
the belly, his cheeks turned green, and his weapon trembled as he
stretched it out at the end of his lean arms. Three times the captain
was on the point of ordering them to fire. He was choked by anguish;
an endless struggle for several seconds set at odds in his mind all
ideas and duties, all his beliefs as a man and as a soldier. The rain
of bricks increased, and he opened his mouth and was about to shout
"Fire!" when the guns went off of themselves three shots at first,
then five, then the roll of a volley, then one by itself, some time
afterwards, in the deep silence.

There was stupefaction on all sides. They had fired, and the gaping
crowd stood motionless, as yet unable to believe it. But heart-rending
cries arose while the bugle was sounding to cease firing. And here was
a mad panic, the rush of cattle filled with grapeshot, a wild flight
through the mud. Bbert and Lydie had fallen one on top of the other
at the first three shots, the little girl struck in the face, the boy
wounded beneath the left shoulder. She was crushed, and never stirred
again. But he moved, seized her with both arms in the convulsion of his
agony, as if he wanted to take her again, as he had taken her at the
bottom of the black hiding-place where they had spent the past night.
And Jeanlin, who just then ran up from Rquillart still half asleep,
kicking about in the midst of the smoke, saw him embrace his little
wife and die.

The five other shots had brought down Mother Brul and Captain
Richomme. Struck in the back as he was entreating his mates, he had
fallen on to his knees, and slipping on to one hip he was groaning on
the ground with eyes still full of tears. The old woman, whose breast
had been opened, had fallen back stiff and crackling, like a bundle of
dry faggots, stammering one last oath in the gurgling of blood.

But then the volley swept the field, mowing down the inquisitive groups
who were laughing at the battle a hundred paces off. A ball entered
Mouquet's mouth and threw him down with fractured skull at the feet of
Zacharie and Philomne, whose two youngsters were splashed with red
drops. At the same moment Mouquette received two balls in the belly.
She had seen the soldiers take aim, and in an instinctive movement of
her good nature she had thrown herself in front of Catherine, shouting
out to her to take care; she uttered a loud cry and fell on to her
back overturned by the shock. tienne ran up, wishing to raise her and
take her away; but with a gesture she said it was all over. Then she
groaned, but without ceasing to smile at both of them, as though she
were glad to see them together now that she was going away.

All seemed to be over, and the hurricane of balls was lost in the
distance as far as the frontages of the settlement, when the last
shot, isolated and delayed, was fired. Maheu, struck in the heart,
turned round and fell with his face down into a puddle black with coal.
Maheude leant down in stupefaction.

"Eh! old man, get up. It's nothing, is it?"

Her hands were engaged with Estelle, whom she had to put under one arm
in order to turn her man's head.

"Say something! where are you hurt?"

His eyes were vacant, and his mouth was slavered with bloody foam. She
understood: he was dead. Then she remained seated in the mud with her
daughter under her arm like a bundle, gazing at her old man with a
besotted air.

The pit was free. With a nervous movement the captain had taken off
and then put on his cap, struck by a stone; he preserved his pallid
stiffness in face of the disaster of his life, while his men with mute
faces were reloading. The frightened faces of Ngrel and Dansaert could
be seen at the window of the receiving-room. Souvarine was behind them
with a deep wrinkle on his forehead, as though the nail of his fixed
idea had printed itself there threateningly. On the other side of the
horizon, at the edge of the plain, Bonnemort had not moved, supported
by one hand on his stick, the other hand up to his brows to see better
the murder of his people below. The wounded were howling, the dead were
growing cold, in twisted postures, muddy with the liquid mud of the
thaw, here and there forming puddles among the inky patches of coal
which reappeared beneath the tattered snow. And in the midst of these
human corpses, all small, poor and lean in their wretchedness, lay
Trompette's carcass, a monstrous and pitiful mass of dead flesh.

tienne had not been killed. He was still waiting beside Catherine, who
had fallen from fatigue and anguish, when a sonorous voice made him
start. It was Abb Ranvier, who was coming back after saying mass, and
who, with both arms in the air, with the inspired fury of a prophet,
was calling the wrath of God down on the murderers. He foretold the era
of justice, the approaching extermination of the middle class by fire
from heaven, since it was bringing its crimes to a climax by massacring
the workers and the disinherited of the world.




PART SEVEN




CHAPTER I


The shots fired at Montsou had reached as far as Paris with a
formidable echo. For four days all the opposition journals had been
indignant, displaying atrocious narratives on their front pages:
twenty-five wounded, fourteen dead, including three women and two
children. And there were prisoners taken as well; Levaque had become a
sort of hero, and was credited with a reply of antique sublimity to the
examining magistrate. The empire, hit in mid career by these few balls,
affected the calm of omnipotence, without itself realizing the gravity
of its wound. It was simply an unfortunate collision, something lost
over there in the black country, very far from the Parisian boulevards
which formed public opinion; it would soon be forgotten. The Company
had received official intimation to hush up the affair, and to put
an end to a strike which from its irritating duration was becoming a
social danger.

So on Wednesday morning three of the directors appeared at Montsou. The
little town, sick at heart, which had not dared hitherto to rejoice
over the massacre, now breathed again, and tasted the joy of being
saved. The weather, too, had become fine; there was a bright sun--one
of those first February days which, with their moist warmth, tip the
lilac shoots with green. All the shutters had been flung back at the
administration building, the vast structure seemed alive again. And
cheering rumours were circulating; it was said that the directors,
deeply affected by the catastrophe, had rushed down to open their
paternal arms to the wanderers from the settlements. Now that the
blow had fallen--a more vigorous one doubtless than they had wished
for--they were prodigal in their task of relief, and decreed measures
that were excellent though tardy. First of all they sent away the
Borains, and made much of this extreme concession to their workmen.
Then they put an end to the military occupation of the pits, which
were no longer threatened by the crushed strikers. They also obtained
silence regarding the sentinel who had disappeared from the Voreux;
the district had been searched without finding either the gun or the
corpse, and although there was a suspicion of crime, it was decided
to consider the soldier a deserter. In every way they thus tried to
attenuate matters, trembling with fear for the morrow, judging it
dangerous to acknowledge the irresistible savagery of a crowd set free
amid the falling structure of the old world. And besides, this work of
conciliation did not prevent them from bringing purely administrative
affairs to a satisfactory conclusion; for Deneulin had been seen to
return to the administration buildings, where he met M. Hennebeau.
The negotiations for the purchase of Vandame continued, and it was
considered certain that Deneulin would accept the Company's offers.

But what particularly stirred the country were the great yellow posters
which the directors had stuck up in profusion on the walls. On them
were to be read these few lines, in very large letters: "Workers of
Montsou! We do not wish that the errors of which you have lately seen
the sad effects should deprive sensible and willing workmen of their
livelihood. We shall therefore reopen all the pits on Monday morning,
and when work is resumed we shall examine with care and consideration
those cases in which there may be room for improvement. We shall, in
fact, do all that is just or possible to do." In one morning the ten
thousand colliers passed before these placards. Not one of them spoke,
many shook their heads, others went away with trailing steps, without
changing one line in their motionless faces.

Up till now the settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante had persisted in
its fierce resistance. It seemed that the blood of their mates, which
had reddened the mud of the pit, was barricading the road against
the others. Scarcely a dozen had gone down, merely Pierron and some
sneaks of his sort, whose departure and arrival were gloomily watched
without a gesture or a threat. Therefore a deep suspicion greeted the
placard stuck on to the church. Nothing was said about the returned
certificates in that. Would the Company refuse to take them on again?
and the fear of retaliations, the fraternal idea of protesting against
the dismissal of the more compromised men, made them all obstinate
still. It was dubious; they would see. They would return to the pit
when these gentlemen were good enough to put things plainly. Silence
crushed the low houses. Hunger itself seemed nothing; all might die now
that violent death had passed over their roofs.

But one house, that of the Maheus, remained especially black and mute
in its overwhelming grief. Since she had followed her man to the
cemetery, Maheude kept her teeth clenched. After the battle, she had
allowed tienne to bring back Catherine muddy and half dead; and as she
was undressing her, before the young man, in order to put her to bed,
she thought for a moment that her daughter also had received a ball
in the belly, for the chemise was marked with large patches of blood.
But she soon understood that it was the flood of puberty, which was
at last breaking out in the shock of this abominable day. Ah! another
piece of luck, that wound! A fine present, to be able to make children
for the gendarmes to kill; and she never spoke to Catherine, nor did
she, indeed, talk to tienne. The latter slept with Jeanlin, at the
risk of being arrested, seized by such horror at the idea of going back
to the darkness of Rquillart that he would have preferred a prison.
A shudder shook him, the horror of the night after all those deaths,
an unacknowledged fear of the little soldier who slept down there
underneath the rocks. Besides, he dreamed of a prison as of a refuge
in the midst of the torment of his defeat; but they did not trouble
him, and he dragged on his wretched hours, not knowing how to weary out
his body. Only at times Maheude looked at both of them, at him and her
daughter, with a spiteful air, as though she were asking them what they
were doing in her house.

Once more they were all snoring in a heap. Father Bonnemort occupied
the former bed of the two youngsters, who slept with Catherine now
that poor Alzire no longer dug her hump into her big sister's ribs. It
was when going to bed that the mother felt the emptiness of the house
by the coldness of her bed, which was now too large. In vain she took
Estelle to fill the vacancy; that did not replace her man, and she wept
quietly for hours. Then the days began to pass by as before, always
without bread, but without the luck to die outright; things picked up
here and there rendered to the wretches the poor service of keeping
them alive. Nothing had changed in their existence, only her man was
gone.

On the afternoon of the fifth day, tienne, made miserable by the sight
of this silent woman, left the room, and walked slowly along the paved
street of the settlement. The inaction which weighed on him impelled
him to take constant walks, with arms swinging idly and lowered head,
always tortured by the same thought. He tramped thus for half an hour,
when he felt, by an increase in his discomfort, that his mates were
coming to their doors to look at him. His little remaining popularity
had been driven to the winds by that fusillade, and he never passed
now without meeting fiery looks which pursued him. When he raised his
head there were threatening men there, women drawing aside the curtains
from their windows; and beneath this still silent accusation and the
restrained anger of these eyes, enlarged by hunger and tears, he became
awkward and could scarcely walk straight. These dumb reproaches seemed
to be always increasing behind him. He became so terrified, lest he
should hear the entire settlement come out to shout its wretchedness at
him, that he returned shuddering. But at the Maheus' the scene which
met him still further agitated him. Old Bonnemort was near the cold
fireplace, nailed to his chair ever since two neighbours, on the day
of the slaughter, had found him on the ground, with his stick broken,
struck down like an old thunder-stricken tree. And while Lnore and
Henri, to beguile their hunger, were scraping, with deafening noise, an
old saucepan in which cabbages had been boiled the day before, Maheude,
after having placed Estelle on the table, was standing up threatening
Catherine with her fist.

"Say that again, by God! Just dare to say that again!"

Catherine had declared her intention to go back to the Voreux. The
idea of not gaining her bread, of being thus tolerated in her mother's
house, like a useless animal that is in the way, was becoming every
day more unbearable; and if it had not been for the fear of Chaval she
would have gone down on Tuesday.

She said again, stammering:

"What would you have? We can't go on doing nothing. We should get
bread, anyhow."

Maheude interrupted her.

"Listen to me: the first one of you who goes to work, I'll do for you.
No, that would be too much, to kill the father and go on taking it out
of the children! I've had enough of it; I'd rather see you all put in
your coffins, like him that's gone already."

And her long silence broke out into a furious flood of words. A fine
sum Catherine would bring her! hardly thirty sous, to which they might
add twenty sous if the bosses were good enough to find work for that
brigand Jeanlin. Fifty sous, and seven mouths to feed! The brats were
only good to swallow soup. As to the grandfather, he must have broken
something in his brain when he fell, for he seemed imbecile; unless it
had turned his blood to see the soldiers firing at his mates.

"That's it, old man, isn't it? They've quite done for you. It's no good
having your hands still strong; you're done for."

Bonnemort looked at her with his dim eyes without understanding. He
remained for hours with fixed gaze, having no intelligence now except
to spit into a plate filled with ashes, which was put beside him for
cleanliness.

"And they've not settled his pension, either," she went on. "And I'm
sure they won't give it, because of our ideas. No! I tell you that
we've had too much to do with those people who bring ill luck."

"But," Catherine ventured to say, "they promise on the placard--"

"Just let me alone with your damned placard! More birdlime for catching
us and eating us. They can be mighty kind now that they have ripped us
open."

"But where shall we go, mother? They won't keep us at the settlement,
sure enough."

Maheude made a vague, terrified gesture. Where should they go to? She
did not know at all; she avoided thinking, it made her mad. They would
go elsewhere--somewhere. And as the noise of the saucepan was becoming
unbearable, she turned round on Lnore and Henri and boxed their ears.
The fall of Estelle, who had been crawling on all fours, increased the
disturbance. The mother quieted her with a push--a good thing if it had
killed her! She spoke of Alzire; she wished the others might have that
child's luck. Then suddenly she burst out into loud sobs, with her head
against the wall.

tienne, who was standing by, did not dare to interfere. He no longer
counted for anything in the house, and even the children drew back from
him suspiciously. But the unfortunate woman's tears went to his heart,
and he murmured:

"Come, come! courage! we must try to get out of it."

She did not seem to hear him, and was bemoaning herself now in a low
continuous complaint.

"Ah! the wretchedness! is it possible? Things did go on before these
horrors. We ate our bread dry, but we were all together; and what has
happened, good God! What have we done, then, that we should have such
troubles--some under the earth, and the others with nothing left but
to long to get there too? It's true enough that they harnessed us
like horses to work, and it's not at all a just sharing of things to
be always getting the stick and making rich people's fortunes bigger
without hope of ever tasting the good things. There's no pleasure in
life when hope goes. Yes, that couldn't have gone on longer; we had to
breathe a bit. If we had only known! Is it possible to make oneself so
wretched through wanting justice?"

Sighs swelled her breast, and her voice choked with immense sadness.

"Then there are always some clever people there who promise you that
everything can be arranged by just taking a little trouble. Then one
loses one's head, and one suffers so much from things as they are that
one asks for things that can't be. Now, I was dreaming like a fool; I
seemed to see a life of good friendship with everybody; I went off into
the air, my faith! into the clouds. And then one breaks one's back when
one tumbles down into the mud again. It's not true; there's nothing
over there of the things that people tell of. What there is, is only
wretchedness, ah! wretchedness, as much as you like of it, and bullets
into the bargain."

tienne listened to this lamentation, and every tear struck him with
remorse. He knew not what to say to calm Maheude, broken by her
terrible fall from the heights of the ideal. She had come back to the
middle of the room, and was now looking at him; she addressed him with
contemptuous familiarity in a last cry of rage:

"And you, do you talk of going back to the pit, too, after driving us
out of the bloody place! I've nothing to reproach you with; but if I
were in your shoes I should be dead of grief by now after causing such
harm to the mates."

He was about to reply, but then shrugged his shoulders in despair. What
was the good of explaining, for she would not understand in her grief?
And he went away, for he was suffering too much, and resumed his wild
walk outside.

There again he found the settlement apparently waiting for him, the
men at the doors, the women at the windows. As soon as he appeared
growls were heard, and the crowd increased. The breath of gossip,
which had been swelling for four days, was breaking out in a universal
malediction. Fists were stretched towards him, mothers spitefully
pointed him out to their boys, old men spat as they looked at him. It
was the change which follows on the morrow of defeat, the fatal reverse
of popularity, an execration exasperated by all the suffering endured
without result. He had to pay for famine and death.

Zacharie, who came up with Philomne, hustled tienne as he went out,
grinning maliciously.

"Well, he gets fat. It's filling, then, to live on other people's
deaths?"

The Levaque woman had already come to her door with Bouteloup. She
spoke of Bbert, her youngster, killed by a bullet, and cried:

"Yes, there are cowards who get children murdered! Let him go and look
for mine in the earth if he wants to give it me back!"

She was forgetting her man in prison, for the household was going on
since Bouteloup remained; but she thought of him, however, and went on
in a shrill voice:

"Get along! rascals may walk about while good people are put away!"

In avoiding her, tienne tumbled on to Pierronne, who was running
up across the gardens. She had regarded her mother's death as a
deliverance, for the old woman's violence threatened to get them
hanged; nor did she weep over Pierron's little girl, that street-walker
Lydie--a good riddance. But she joined in with her neighbours with the
idea of getting reconciled with them.

"And my mother, eh, and the little girl? You were seen; you were hiding
yourself behind them when they caught the lead instead of you!"

What was to be done? Strangle Pierronne and the others, and fight the
whole settlement? tienne wanted to do so for a moment. The blood was
throbbing in his head, he now looked upon his mates as brutes, he was
irritated to see them so unintelligent and barbarous that they wanted
to revenge themselves on him for the logic of facts. How stupid it all
was! and he felt disgust at his powerlessness to tame them again; and
satisfied himself with hastening his steps as though he were deaf to
abuse. Soon it became a flight; every house hooted him as he passed,
they hastened on his heels, it was a whole nation cursing him with a
voice that was becoming like thunder in its overwhelming hatred. It
was he, the exploiter, the murderer, who was the sole cause of their
misfortune. He rushed out of the settlement, pale and terrified, with
this yelling crowd behind his back. When he at last reached the main
road most of them left him; but a few persisted, until at the bottom
of the slope before the Avantage he met another group coming from the
Voreux.

Old Mouque and Chaval were there. Since the death of his daughter
Mouquette, and of his son Mouquet, the old man had continued to act
as groom without a word of regret or complaint. Suddenly, when he saw
tienne, he was shaken by fury, tears broke out from his eyes, and a
flood of coarse words burst from his mouth, black and bleeding from his
habit of chewing tobacco.

"You devil! you bloody swine! you filthy snout! Wait, you've got to pay
me for my poor children; you'll have to come to it!"

He picked up a brick, broke it, and threw both pieces.

"Yes! yes! clear him off!" shouted Chaval, who was grinning in
excitement, delighted at this vengeance. "Every one gets his turn; now
you're up against the wall, you dirty hound!"

And he also attacked tienne with stones. A savage clamour arose; they
all took up bricks, broke them, and threw them, to rip him open, as
they would like to have done to the soldiers. He was dazed and could
not flee; he faced them, trying to calm them with phrases. His old
speeches, once so warmly received, came back to his lips. He repeated
the words with which he had intoxicated them at the time when he could
keep them in hand like a faithful flock; but his power was dead, and
only stones replied to him. He had just been struck on the left arm,
and was drawing back, in great peril, when he found himself hemmed in
against the front of the Avantage.

For the last few moments Rasseneur had been at his door.

"Come in," he said simply.

tienne hesitated; it choked him to take refuge there.

"Come in; then I'll speak to them."

He resigned himself, and took refuge at the other end of the parlour,
while the innkeeper filled up the doorway with his broad shoulders.

"Look here, my friends, just be reasonable. You know very well that
I've never deceived you. I've always been in favour of quietness, and
if you had listened to me, you certainly wouldn't be where you are now."

Rolling his shoulders and belly, he went on at length, allowing his
facile eloquence to flow with the lulling gentleness of warm water. And
all his old success came back; he regained his popularity, naturally
and without an effort, as if he had never been hooted and called a
coward a month before. Voices arose in approval: "Very good! we are
with you! that is the way to put it!" Thundering applause broke out.

tienne, in the background, grew faint, and there was bitterness at his
heart. He recalled Rasseneur's prediction in the forest, threatening
him with the ingratitude of the mob. What imbecile brutality! What an
abominable forgetfulness of old services! It was a blind force which
constantly devoured itself. And beneath his anger at seeing these
brutes spoil their own cause, there was despair at his own fall and
the tragic end of his ambition. What! was it already done for! He
remembered hearing beneath the beeches three thousand hearts beating
to the echo of his own. On that day he had held his popularity in both
hands. Those people belonged to him; he felt that he was their master.
Mad dreams had then intoxicated him. Montsou at his feet, Paris beyond,
becoming a deputy perhaps, crushing the middle class in a speech, the
first speech ever pronounced by a workman in a parliament. And it
was all over! He awakened, miserable and detested; his people were
dismissing him by flinging bricks.

Rasseneur's voice rose higher:

"Never will violence succeed; the world can't be remade in a day. Those
who have promised you to change it all at one stroke are either making
fun of you or they are rascals!"

"Bravo! bravo!" shouted the crowd.

Who then was the guilty one? And this question which tienne put to
himself overwhelmed him more than ever. Was it in fact his fault, this
misfortune which was making him bleed, the wretchedness of some, the
murder of others, these women, these children, lean, and without bread?
He had had that lamentable vision one evening before the catastrophe.
But then a force was lifting him, he was carried away with his mates.
Besides, he had never led them, it was they who led him, who obliged
him to do things which he would never have done if it were not for the
shock of that crowd pushing behind him. At each new violence he had
been stupefied by the course of events, for he had neither foreseen
nor desired any of them. Could he anticipate, for instance, that his
followers in the settlement would one day stone him? These infuriated
people lied when they accused him of having promised them an existence
all fodder and laziness. And in this justification, in this reasoning,
in which he tried to fight against his remorse, was hidden the anxiety
that he had not risen to the height of his task; it was the doubt of
the half-cultured man still perplexing him. But he felt himself at the
end of his courage, he was no longer at heart with his mates; he feared
this enormous mass of the people, blind and irresistible, moving like a
force of nature, sweeping away everything, outside rules and theories.
A certain repugnance was detaching him from them--the discomfort of his
new tastes, the slow movement of all his being towards a superior class.

At this moment Rasseneur's voice was lost in the midst of enthusiastic
shouts:

"Hurrah for Rasseneur! he's the fellow! Bravo, bravo!"

The innkeeper shut the door, while the band dispersed; and the two men
looked at each other in silence. They both shrugged their shoulders.
They finished up by having a drink together.

On the same day there was a great dinner at Piolaine; they were
celebrating the betrothal of Ngrel and Ccile. Since the previous
evening the Grgoires had had the dining-room waxed and the
drawing-room dusted. Mlanie reigned in the kitchen, watching over the
roasts and stirring the sauces, the odour of which ascended to the
attics. It had been decided that Francis, the coachman, should help
Honorine to wait. The gardener's wife would wash up, and the gardener
would open the gate. Never had the substantial, patriarchal old house
been in such a state of gaiety.

Everything went off beautifully, Madame Hennebeau was charming with
Ccile, and she smiled at Ngrel when the Montsou lawyer gallantly
proposed the health of the future household. M. Hennebeau was also very
amiable. His smiling face struck the guests. The report circulated that
he was rising in favour with the directors, and that he would soon be
made an officer of the Legion of Honour, on account of the energetic
manner in which he had put down the strike. Nothing was said about
recent events; but there was an air of triumph in the general joy,
and the dinner became the official celebration of a victory. At last,
then, they were saved, and once more they could begin to eat and sleep
in peace. A discreet allusion was made to those dead whose blood the
Voreux mud had yet scarcely drunk up. It was a necessary lesson: and
they were all affected when the Grgoires added that it was now the
duty of all to go and heal the wounds in the settlements. They had
regained their benevolent placidity, excusing their brave miners, whom
they could already see again at the bottom of the mines, giving a good
example of everlasting resignation. The Montsou notables, who had now
left off trembling, agreed that this question of the wage system ought
to be studied, cautiously. The roasts came on; and the victory became
complete when M. Hennebeau read a letter from the bishop announcing
Abb Ranvier's removal. The middle class throughout the province
had been roused to anger by the story of this priest who treated
the soldiers as murderers. And when the dessert appeared the lawyer
resolutely declared that he was a free-thinker.

Deneulin was there with his two daughters. In the midst of the joy, he
forced himself to hide the melancholy of his ruin. That very morning he
had signed the sale of his Vandame concession to the Montsou Company.
With the knife at his throat he had submitted to the directors'
demands, at last giving up to them that prey they had been on the
watch for so long, scarcely obtaining from them the money necessary
to pay off his creditors. He had even accepted, as a lucky chance, at
the last moment, their offer to keep him as divisional engineer, thus
resigning himself to watch, as a simple salaried servant, over that pit
which had swallowed up his fortune. It was the knell of small personal
enterprises, the approaching disappearance of the masters, eaten up,
one by one, by the ever-hungry ogre of capital, drowned in the rising
flood of great companies. He alone paid the expenses of the strike;
he understood that they were drinking to his disaster when they drank
to M. Hennebeau's rosette. And he only consoled himself a little when
he saw the fine courage of Lucie and Jeanne, who looked charming in
their done-up toilettes, laughing at the downfall, like happy tomboys
disdainful of money.

When they passed into the drawing-room for coffee, M. Grgoire drew his
cousin aside and congratulated him on the courage of his decision.

"What would you have? Your real mistake was to risk the million of your
Montsou denier over Vandame. You gave yourself a terrible wound, and it
has melted away in that dog's labour, while mine, which has not stirred
from my drawer, still keeps me comfortably doing nothing, as it will
keep my grandchildren's children."




CHAPTER II


On Sunday tienne escaped from the settlement at nightfall. A very
clear sky, sprinkled with stars, lit up the earth with the blue haze
of twilight. He went down towards the canal, and followed the bank
slowly, in the direction of Marchiennes. It was his favourite walk,
a grass-covered path two leagues long, passing straight beside this
geometrical water-way, which unrolled itself like an endless ingot
of molten silver. He never met any one there. But on this day he was
vexed to see a man come up to him. Beneath the pale starlight, the two
solitary walkers only recognized each other when they were face to face.

"What! is it you?" said tienne.

Souvarine nodded his head without replying. For a moment they remained
motionless, then side by side they set out towards Marchiennes. Each of
them seemed to be continuing his own reflections, as though they were
far away from each other.

"Have you seen in the paper about Pluchart's success at Paris?" asked
tienne, at length. "After that meeting at Belleville, they waited for
him on the pavement, and gave him an ovation. Oh! he's afloat now, in
spite of his sore throat. He can do what he likes in the future."

The engine-man shrugged his shoulders. He felt contempt for fine
talkers, fellows who go into politics as one goes to the bar, to get an
income out of phrases.

tienne was now studying Darwin. He had read fragments, summarized
and popularized in a five-sou volume; and out of this ill-understood
reading he had gained for himself a revolutionary idea of the struggle
for existence, the lean eating the fat, the strong people devouring the
pallid middle class. But Souvarine furiously attacked the stupidity
of the Socialists who accept Darwin, that apostle of scientific
inequality, whose famous selection was only good for aristocratic
philosophers. His mate persisted, however, wishing to reason out the
matter, and expressing his doubts by an hypothesis: supposing the old
society were no longer to exist, swept away to the crumbs; well, was
it not to be feared that the new world would grow up again, slowly
spoilt by the same injustices, some sick and others flourishing, some
more skilful and intelligent, fattening on everything, and others
imbecile and lazy, becoming slaves again? But before this vision of
eternal wretchedness, the engine-man shouted out fiercely that if
justice was not possible with man, then man must disappear. For every
rotten society there must be a massacre, until the last creature was
exterminated. And there was silence again.

For a long time, with sunken head, Souvarine walked over the short
grass, so absorbed that he kept to the extreme edge, by the water, with
the quiet certainty of a sleep-walker on a roof. Then he shuddered
causelessly, as though he had stumbled against a shadow. His eyes
lifted and his face was very pale; he said softly to his companion:

"Did I ever tell you how she died?"

"Whom do you mean?"

"My wife, over there, in Russia."

tienne made a vague gesture, astonished at the tremor in his voice and
at the sudden desire for confidence in this lad, who was usually so
impassive in his stoical detachment from others and from himself. He
only knew that the woman was his mistress, and that she had been hanged
at Moscow.

"The affair hadn't gone off," Souvarine said, with eyes still vacantly
following the white stream of the canal between the bluish colonnades
of tall trees. "We had been a fortnight at the bottom of a hole
undermining the railway, and it was not the imperial train that was
blown up, it was a passenger train. Then they arrested Annutchka. She
brought us bread every evening, disguised as a peasant woman. She lit
the fuse, too, because a man might have attracted attention. I followed
the trial, hidden in the crowd, for six days."

His voice became thick, and he coughed as though he were choking.

"Twice I wanted to cry out, and to rush over the people's heads to join
her. But what was the good? One man less would be one soldier less; and
I could see that she was telling me not to come, when her large eyes
met mine."

He coughed again.

"On the last day in the square I was there. It was raining; they
stupidly lost their heads, put out by the falling rain. It took twenty
minutes to hang the other four; the cord broke, they could not finish
the fourth. Annutchka was standing up waiting. She could not see me,
she was looking for me in the crowd. I got on to a post and she saw me,
and our eyes never turned from each other. When she was dead she was
still looking at me. I waved my hat; I came away."

There was silence again. The white road of the canal unrolled to the
far distance, and they both walked with the same quiet step as though
each had fallen back into his isolation. At the horizon, the pale water
seemed to open the sky with a little hole of light.

"It was our punishment," Souvarine went on roughly. "We were guilty to
love each other. Yes, it is well that she is dead; heroes will be born
from her blood, and I no longer have any cowardice at my heart. Ah!
nothing, neither parents, nor wife, nor friend! Nothing to make my hand
tremble on the day when I must take others' lives or give up my own."

tienne had stopped, shuddering in the cool night. He discussed no
more, he simply said:

"We have gone far; shall we go back?"

They went back towards the Voreux slowly, and he added, after a few
paces:

"Have you seen the new placards?"

The Company had that morning put up some more large yellow posters.
They were clearer and more conciliatory, and the Company undertook
to take back the certificates of those miners who went down on the
following day. Everything would be forgotten, and pardon was offered
even to those who were most implicated.

"Yes, I've seen," replied the engine-man.

"Well, what do you think of it?"

"I think that it's all up. The flock will go down again. You are all
too cowardly."

tienne feverishly excused his mates: a man may be brave, a mob which
is dying of hunger has no strength. Step by step they were returning to
the Voreux; and before the black mass of the pit he continued swearing
that he, at least, would never go down; but he could forgive those
who did. Then, as the rumour ran that the carpenters had not had time
to repair the tubbing, he asked for information. Was it true? Had the
weight of the soil against the timber which formed the internal skirt
of scaffolding to the shaft so pushed it in that the winding-cages
rubbed as they went down for a length of over fifty metres?

Souvarine, who once more became uncommunicative, replied briefly. He
had been working the day before, and the cage did, in fact, jar; the
engine-men had even had to double the speed to pass that spot. But all
the bosses received any observations with the same irritating remark:
it was coal they wanted; that could be repaired later on.

"You see that will smash up!" tienne murmured. "It will be a fine
time!"

With eyes vaguely fixed on the pit in the shadow, Souvarine quietly
concluded:

"If it does smash up, the mates will know it, since you advise them to
go down again."

Nine o'clock struck at the Montsou steeple; and his companion having
said that he was going to bed, he added, without putting out his hand:

"Well, good-bye. I'm going away."

"What! you're going away?"

"Yes, I've asked for my certificate back. I'm going elsewhere."

tienne, stupefied and affected, looked at him. After walking for two
hours he said that to him! And in so calm a voice, while the mere
announcement of this sudden separation made his own heart ache. They
had got to know each other, they had toiled together; that always makes
one sad, the idea of not seeing a person again.

"You're going away! And where do you go?"

"Over there--I don't know at all."

"But I shall see you again?"

"No, I think not."

They were silent and remained for a moment facing each other without
finding anything to say.

"Then good-bye."

"Good-bye."

While tienne ascended toward the settlement, Souvarine turned and
again went along the canal bank; and there, now alone, he continued to
walk, with sunken head, so lost in the darkness that he seemed merely
a moving shadow of the night. Now and then he stopped, he counted the
hours that struck afar. When he heard midnight strike he left the bank
and turned towards the Voreux.

At that time the pit was empty, and he only met a sleepy-eyed captain.
It was not until two o'clock that they would begin to get up steam to
resume work. First he went to take from a cupboard a jacket which he
pretended to have forgotten. Various tools--a drill armed with its
screw, a small but very strong saw, a hammer, and a chisel--were rolled
up in this jacket. Then he left. But instead of going out through the
shed he passed through the narrow corridor which led to the ladder
passage. With his jacket under his arm he quietly went down without a
lamp, measuring the depth by counting the ladders. He knew that the
cage jarred at three hundred and seventy-four metres against the fifth
row of the lower tubbing. When he had counted fifty-four ladders he
put out his hand and was able to feel the swelling of the planking.
It was there. Then, with the skill and coolness of a good workman who
has been reflecting over his task for a long time, he set to work. He
began by sawing a panel in the brattice so as to communicate with the
winding-shaft. With the help of matches, quickly lighted and blown out,
he was then able to ascertain the condition of the tubbing and of the
recent repairs.

Between Calais and Valenciennes the sinking of mine shafts was
surrounded by immense difficulties on account of the masses of
subterranean water in great sheets at the level of the lowest valleys.
Only the construction of tubbings, frameworks jointed like the stays
of a barrel, could keep out the springs which flow in and isolate the
shafts in the midst of the lakes, which with deep obscure waves beat
against the walls. It had been necessary in sinking the Voreux to
establish two tubbings: that of the upper level, in the shifting sands
and white clays bordering the chalky stratum, and fissured in every
part, swollen with water like a sponge; then that of the lower level,
immediately above the coal stratum, in a yellow sand as fine as flour,
flowing with liquid fluidity; it was here that the Torrent was to be
found, that subterranean sea so dreaded in the coal pits of the Nord,
a sea with its storms and its shipwrecks, an unknown and unfathomable
sea, rolling its dark floods more than three hundred metres beneath the
daylight. Usually the tubbings resisted the enormous pressure; the only
thing to be dreaded was the piling up of the neighbouring soil, shaken
by the constant movement of the old galleries which were filling up.
In this descent of the rocks lines of fracture were sometimes produced
which slowly extended as far as the scaffolding, at last perforating
it and pushing it into the shaft; and there was the great danger of a
landslip and a flood filling the pit with an avalanche of earth and a
deluge of springs.

Souvarine, sitting astride in the opening he had made, discovered a
very serious defect in the fifth row of tubbing. The wood was bellied
out from the framework; several planks had even come out of their
shoulder-pieces. Abundant filtrations, _pichoux_ the miners call
them, were jetting out of the joints through the tarred oakum with
which they were caulked. The carpenters, pressed for time, had been
content to place iron squares at the angles, so carelessly that not all
the screws were put in. A considerable movement was evidently going on
behind in the sand of the Torrent.

Then with his wimble he unscrewed the squares so that another push
would tear them all off. It was a foolhardy task, during which he
frequently only just escaped from falling headlong down the hundred and
eighty metres which separated him from the bottom. He had been obliged
to seize the oak guides, the joists along which the cages slid; and
suspended over the void he traversed the length of the cross-beams with
which they were joined from point to point, slipping along, sitting
down, turning over, simply buttressing himself on an elbow or a knee,
with tranquil contempt of death. A breath would have sent him over,
and three times he caught himself up without a shudder. First he felt
with his hand and then worked, only lighting a match when he lost
himself in the midst of these slimy beams. After loosening the screws
he attacked the wood itself, and the peril became still greater. He
had sought for the key, the piece which held the others; he attacked
it furiously, making holes in it, sawing it, thinning it so that it
lost its resistance; while through the holes and the cracks the water
which escaped in small jets blinded him and soaked him in icy rain.
Two matches were extinguished. They all became damp and then there was
night, the bottomless depth of darkness.

From this moment he was seized by rage. The breath of the invisible
intoxicated him, the black horror of this rain-beaten hole urged him
to mad destruction. He wreaked his fury at random against the tubbing,
striking where he could with his wimble, with his saw, seized by the
desire to bring the whole thing at once down on his head. He brought
as much ferocity to the task as though he had been digging a knife
into the skin of some execrated living creature. He would kill the
Voreux at last, that evil beast with ever-open jaws which had swallowed
so much human flesh! The bite of his tools could be heard, his spine
lengthened, he crawled, climbed down, then up again, holding on by a
miracle, in continual movement, the flight of a nocturnal bird amid the
scaffolding of a belfry.

But he grew calm, dissatisfied with himself. Why could not things be
done coolly? Without haste he took breath, and then went back into
the ladder passage, stopping up the hole by replacing the panel which
he had sawn. That was enough; he did not wish to raise the alarm by
excessive damage which would have been repaired immediately. The beast
was wounded in the belly; we should see if it was still alive at night.
And he had left his mark; the frightened world would know that the
beast had not died a natural death. He took his time in methodically
rolling up his tools in his jacket, and slowly climbed up the ladders.
Then, when he had emerged from the pit without being seen, it did not
even occur to him to go and change his clothes. Three o'clock struck.
He remained standing on the road waiting.

At the same hour tienne, who was not asleep, was disturbed by a slight
sound in the thick night of the room. He distinguished the low breath
of the children, and the snoring of Bonnemort and Maheude; while
Jeanlin near him was breathing with a prolonged flute-like whistle.
No doubt he had dreamed, and he was turning back when the noise began
again. It was the creaking of a palliasse, the stifled effort of
someone who is getting up. Then he imagined that Catherine must be ill.

"I say, is it you? What is the matter?" he asked in a low voice.

No one replied, and the snoring of the others continued. For five
minutes nothing stirred. Then there was fresh creaking. Feeling certain
this time that he was not mistaken, he crossed the room, putting his
hands out into the darkness to feel the opposite bed. He was surprised
to find the young girl sitting up, holding in her breath, awake and on
the watch.

"Well! why don't you reply? What are you doing, then?"

At last she said:

"I'm getting up."

"Getting up at this hour?"

"Yes, I'm going back to work at the pit."

tienne felt deeply moved, and sat down on the edge of the palliasse,
while Catherine explained her reasons to him. She suffered too much by
living thus in idleness, feeling continual looks of reproach weighing
on her; she would rather run the risk of being knocked about down there
by Chaval. And if her mother refused to take her money when she brought
it, well! she was big enough to act for herself and make her own soup.

"Go away; I want to dress. And don't say anything, will you, if you
want to be kind?"

But he remained near her; he had put his arms round her waist in a
caress of grief and pity. Pressed one against the other in their
shirts, they could feel the warmth of each other's naked flesh, at
the edge of this bed, still moist with the night's sleep. She had at
first tried to free herself; then she began to cry quietly, in her
turn taking him by the neck to press him against her in a despairing
clasp. And they remained, without any further desires, with the past of
their unfortunate love, which they had not been able to satisfy. Was
it, then, done with for ever? Would they never dare to love each other
some day, now that they were free? It only needed a little happiness
to dissipate their shame--that awkwardness which prevented them from
coming together because of all sorts of ideas which they themselves
could not read clearly.

"Go to bed again," she whispered. "I don't want to light up, it would
wake mother. It is time; leave me."

He could not hear; he was pressing her wildly, with a heart drowned
in immense sadness. The need for peace, an irresistible need for
happiness, was carrying him away; and he saw himself married, in a neat
little house, with no other ambition than to live and to die there,
both of them together. He would be satisfied with bread; and if there
were only enough for one, she should have it. What was the good of
anything else? Was there anything in life worth more?

But she was unfolding her naked arms.

"Please, leave me."

Then, in a sudden impulse, he said in her ear:

"Wait, I'm coming with you."

And he was himself surprised at what he had said. He had sworn never
to go down again; whence then came this sudden decision, arising from
his lips without thought of his, without even a moment's discussion?
There was now such calm within him, so complete a cure of his doubts,
that he persisted like a man saved by chance, who has at last found the
only harbour from his torment. So he refused to listen to her when she
became alarmed, understanding that he was devoting himself for her and
fearing the ill words which would greet him at the pit. He laughed at
everything; the placards promised pardon and that was enough.

"I want to work; that's my idea. Let us dress and make no noise."

They dressed themselves in the darkness, with a thousand precautions.
She had secretly prepared her miner's clothes the evening before; he
took a jacket and breeches from the cupboard; and they did not wash
themselves for fear of knocking the bowl. All were asleep, but they had
to cross the narrow passage where the mother slept. When they started,
as ill luck would have it, they stumbled against a chair. She woke and
asked drowsily:

"Eh! what is it?"

Catherine had stopped, trembling, and violently pressing tienne's hand.

"It's me; don't trouble yourself," he said. "I feel stifled and am
going outside to breathe a bit."

"Very well."

And Maheude fell asleep again. Catherine dared not stir. At last she
went down into the parlour and divided a slice of bread-and-butter
which she had reserved from a loaf given by a Montsou lady. Then they
softly closed the door and went away.

Souvarine had remained standing near the Avantage, at the corner of the
road. For half an hour he had been looking at the colliers who were
returning to work in the darkness, passing by with the dull tramp of
a herd. He was counting them, as a butcher counts his beasts at the
entrance to the slaughter-house, and he was surprised at their number;
even his pessimism had not foreseen that the number of cowards would
have been so great. The stream continued to pass by, and he grew stiff,
very cold, with clenched teeth and bright eyes.

But he started. Among the men passing by, whose faces he could not
distinguish, he had just recognized one by his walk. He came forward
and stopped him.

"Where are you going to?"

tienne, in surprise, instead of replying, stammered:

"What! you've not set out yet!"

Then he confessed he was going back to the pit. No doubt he had sworn;
only it could not be called life to wait with folded arms for things
which would perhaps happen in a hundred years; and, besides, reasons of
his own had decided him.

Souvarine had listened to him, shuddering. He seized him by the
shoulder, and pushed him towards the settlement.

"Go home again; I want you to. Do you understand?"

But Catherine having approached, he recognized her also. tienne
protested, declaring that he allowed no one to judge his conduct. And
the engine-man's eyes went from the young girl to her companion, while
he stepped back with a sudden, relinquishing movement. When there was a
woman in a man's heart, that man was done for; he might die. Perhaps he
saw again in a rapid vision his mistress hanging over there at Moscow,
that last link cut from his flesh, which had rendered him free of the
lives of others and of his own life. He said simply:

"Go."

tienne, feeling awkward, was delaying, and trying to find some
friendly word, so as not to separate in this manner.

"Then you're still going?"

"Yes."

"Well, give me your hand, old chap. A pleasant journey, and no ill
feeling."

The other stretched out an icy hand. Neither friend nor wife.

"Good-bye for good this time."

"Yes, good-bye."

And Souvarine, standing motionless in the darkness, watched tienne and
Catherine entering the Voreux.




CHAPTER III


At four o'clock the descent began. Dansaert, who was personally
installed at the marker's office in the lamp cabin, wrote down the name
of each worker who presented himself and had a lamp given to him. He
took them all, without remark, keeping to the promise of the placards.
When, however, he noticed tienne and Catherine at the wicket, he
started and became very red, and was opening his mouth to refuse their
names; then, he contented himself with the triumph, and a jeer. Ah! ah!
so the strong man was thrown? The Company was, then, in luck since the
terrible Montsou wrestler had come back to it to ask for bread? tienne
silently took his lamp and went towards the shaft with the putter.

But it was there, in the receiving-room, that Catherine feared the
mates' bad words. At the very entrance she recognized Chaval, in the
midst of some twenty miners, waiting till a cage was free. He came
furiously towards her, but the sight of tienne stopped him. Then he
affected to sneer with an offensive shrug of the shoulders.

Very good! he didn't care a hang, since the other had come to occupy
the place that was still warm; good riddance! It only concerned the
gentleman if he liked the leavings; and beneath the exhibition of this
contempt he was again seized by a tremor of jealousy, and his eyes
flamed. For the rest, the mates did not stir, standing silent, with
eyes lowered. They contented themselves with casting a sidelong look
at the new-comers; then, dejected and without anger, they again stared
fixedly at the mouth of the shaft, with their lamps in their hands,
shivering beneath their thin jackets, in the constant draughts of this
large room. At last the cage was wedged on to the keeps, and they were
ordered to get in. Catherine and tienne were squeezed in one tram,
already containing Pierron and two pikemen. Beside them, in the other
tram, Chaval was loudly saying to Father Mouque that the directors had
made a mistake in not taking advantage of the opportunity to free the
pits of the blackguards who were corrupting them; but the old groom,
who had already fallen back into the dog-like resignation of his
existence, no longer grew angry over the death of his children, and
simply replied by a gesture of conciliation.

The cage freed itself and slipped down into the darkness. No one spoke.
Suddenly, when they were in the middle third of the descent, there was
a terrible jarring. The iron creaked, and the men were thrown on to
each other.

"By God!" growled tienne, "are they going to flatten us? We shall end
by being left here for good, with their confounded tubbing. And they
talk about having repaired it!"

The cage had, however, cleared the obstacle. It was now descending
beneath so violent a rain, like a storm, that the workmen anxiously
listened to the pouring. A number of leaks must then have appeared in
the caulking of the joints.

Pierron, who had been working for several days, when asked about it did
not like to show his fear, which might be considered as an attack on
the management, so he only replied:

"Oh, no danger! it's always like that. No doubt they've not had time to
caulk the leaks."

The torrent was roaring over their heads, and they at last reached the
pit-eye beneath a veritable waterspout. Not one of the captains had
thought of climbing up the ladders to investigate the matter. The pump
would be enough, the carpenters would examine the joints the following
night. The reorganization of work in the galleries gave considerable
trouble. Before allowing the pikemen to return to their hewing cells,
the engineer had decided that for the first five days all the men
should execute certain works of consolidation which were extremely
urgent. Landslips were threatening everywhere; the passages had
suffered to such an extent that the timbering had to be repaired along
a length of several hundred metres. Gangs of ten men were therefore
formed below, each beneath the control of a captain. Then they were set
to work at the most damaged spots. When the descent was complete, it
was found that three hundred and twenty-two miners had gone down, about
half of those who worked there when the pit was in full swing.

Chaval belonged to the same gang as Catherine and tienne. This was
not by chance; he had at first hidden behind his mates, and had then
forced the captain's hand. This gang went to the end of the north
gallery, nearly three kilometres away, to clear out a landslip which
was stopping up a gallery in the Dix-Huit-Pouces seam. They attacked
the fallen rocks with shovel and pick. tienne, Chaval, and five others
cleared away the rubbish while Catherine, with two trammers, wheeled
the earth up to the upbrow. They seldom spoke, and the captain never
left them. The putter's two lovers, however, were on the point of
coming to blows. While growling that he had had enough of this trollop,
Chaval was still thinking of her, and slyly hustling her about, so that
tienne had threatened to settle him if he did not leave her alone.
They eyed each other fiercely, and had to be separated.

Towards eight o'clock Dansaert passed to give a glance at the work. He
appeared to be in a very bad humour, and was furious with the captain;
nothing had gone well, what was the meaning of such work, the planking
would everywhere have to be done over again! And he went away declaring
that he would come back with the engineer. He had been waiting for
Ngrel since morning, and could not understand the cause of this delay.

Another hour passed by. The captain had stopped the removal of the
rubbish to employ all his people in supporting the roof. Even the
putter and the two trammers left off wheeling to prepare and bring
pieces of timber. At this end of the gallery the gang formed a sort
of advance guard at the very extremity of the mine, now without
communication with the other stalls. Three or four times strange
noises, distant rushes, made the workers turn their heads to listen.
What was it, then? One would have said that the passages were being
emptied and the mates already returning at a running pace. But the
sound was lost in the deep silence, and they set to wedging their wood
again, dazed by the loud blows of the hammer. At last they returned to
the rubbish, and the wheeling began once more. Catherine came back from
her first journey in terror, saying that no one was to be found at the
upbrow.

"I called, but there was no reply. They've all cleared out of the
place."

The bewilderment was so great that the ten men threw down their tools
to rush away. The idea that they were abandoned, left alone at the
bottom of the mine, so far from the pit-eye, drove them wild. They only
kept their lamps and ran in single file--the men, the boys, the putter;
the captain himself lost his head and shouted out appeals, more and
more frightened at the silence in this endless desert of galleries.
What then had happened that they did not meet a soul? What accident
could thus have driven away their mates? Their terror was increased
by the uncertainty of the danger, this threat which they felt there
without knowing what it was.

When they at last came near the pit-eye, a torrent barred their road.
They were at once in water to the knees, and were no longer able to
run, laboriously fording the flood with the thought that one minute's
delay might mean death.

"By God! it's the tubbing that's given way," cried tienne. "I said we
should be left here for good."

Since the descent Pierron had anxiously observed the increase of the
deluge which fell from the shaft. As with two others he loaded the
trams he raised his head, his face covered with large drops, and his
ears ringing with the roar of the tempest above. But he trembled
especially when he noticed that the sump beneath him, that pit ten
metres deep, was filling; the water was already spurting through the
floor and covering the metal plates. This showed that the pump was
no longer sufficient to fight against the leaks. He heard it panting
with the groan of fatigue. Then he warned Dansaert, who swore angrily,
replying that they must wait for the engineer. Twice he returned to the
charge without extracting anything else but exasperated shrugs of the
shoulder. Well! the water was rising; what could he do?

Mouque appeared with Bataille, whom he was leading to work, and he had
to hold him with both hands, for the sleepy old horse had suddenly
reared up, and, with a shrill neigh, was stretching his head towards
the shaft.

"Well, philosopher, what troubles you? Ah! it's because it rains. Come
along, that doesn't concern you."

But the beast quivered all over his skin, and Mouque forcibly drew him
to the haulage gallery.

Almost at the same moment as Mouque and Bataille were disappearing at
the end of a gallery, there was a crackling in the air, followed by
the prolonged noise of a fall. It was a piece of tubbing which had got
loose and was falling a hundred and eighty metres down, rebounding
against the walls. Pierron and the other porters were able to get
out of the way, and the oak plank only smashed an empty tram. At
the same time, a mass of water, the leaping flood of a broken dyke,
rushed down. Dansaert proposed to go up and examine; but, while he was
still speaking, another piece rolled down. And in terror before the
threatening catastrophe, he no longer hesitated, but gave the order to
go up, sending captains to warn the men in their stalls.

Then a terrible hustling began. From every gallery rows of workers
came rushing up, trying to take the cages by assault. They crushed
madly against each other in order to be taken up at once. Some who had
thought of trying the ladder passage came down again shouting that it
was already stopped up. That was the terror they all felt each time
that the cage rose; this time it was able to pass, but who knew if it
would be able to pass again in the midst of the obstacles obstructing
the shaft? The downfall must be continuing above, for a series of low
detonations was heard, the planks were splitting and bursting amid
the continuous and increasing roar of a storm. One cage soon became
useless, broken in and no longer sliding between the guides, which
were doubtless broken. The other jarred to such a degree that the
cable would certainly break soon. And there remained a hundred men
to be taken up, all panting, clinging to one another, bleeding and
half-drowned. Two were killed by falls of planking. A third, who had
seized the cage, fell back fifty metres up and disappeared in the sump.

Dansaert, however, was trying to arrange matters in an orderly manner.
Armed with a pick he threatened to open the skull of the first man who
refused to obey; and he tried to arrange them in file, shouting that
the porters were to go up last after having sent up their mates. He was
not listened to, and he had to prevent the pale and cowardly Pierron
from entering among the first. At each departure he pushed him aside
with a blow. But his own teeth were chattering, a minute more and he
would be swallowed up; everything was smashing up there, a flood had
broken loose, a murderous rain of scaffolding. A few men were still
running up when, mad with fear, he jumped into a tram, allowing Pierron
to jump in behind him. The cage rose.

At this moment the gang to which tienne and Chaval belonged had just
reached the pit-eye. They saw the cage disappear and rushed forward,
but they had to draw back from the final downfall of the tubbing; the
shaft was stopped up and the cage would not come down again. Catherine
was sobbing, and Chaval was choked with shouting oaths. There were
twenty of them; were those bloody bosses going to abandon them thus?
Father Mouque, who had brought back Bataille without hurrying, was
still holding him by the bridle, both of them stupefied, the man and
the beast, in the face of this rapid flow of the inundation. The water
was already rising to their thighs. tienne in silence, with clenched
teeth, supported Catherine between his arms. And the twenty yelled with
their faces turned up, obstinately gazing at the shaft like imbeciles,
that shifting hole which was belching out a flood and from which no
help could henceforth come to them.

At the surface, Dansaert, on arriving, perceived Ngrel running up. By
some fatality, Madame Hennebeau had that morning delayed him on rising,
turning over the leaves of catalogues for the purchase of wedding
presents. It was ten o'clock.

"Well! what's happening, then?" he shouted from afar.

"The pit is ruined," replied the head captain.

And he described the catastrophe in a few stammered words, while the
engineer incredulously shrugged his shoulders. What! could tubbing
be demolished like that? They were exaggerating; he would make an
examination.

"I suppose no one has been left at the bottom?"

Dansaert was confused. No, no one; at least, so he hoped. But some of
the men might have been delayed.

"But," said Ngrel, "what in the name of creation have you come up for,
then? You can't leave your men!"

He immediately gave orders to count the lamps. In the morning three
hundred and twenty-two had been distributed, and now only two hundred
and fifty-five could be found; but several men acknowledged that in
the hustling and panic they had dropped theirs and left them behind.
An attempt was made to call over the men, but it was impossible to
establish the exact number. Some of the miners had gone away, others
did not hear their names. No one was agreed as to the number of the
missing mates. It might be twenty, perhaps forty. And the engineer
could only make out one thing with certainty: there were men down
below, for their yells could be distinguished through the sound of the
water and the fallen scaffolding, on leaning over the mouth of the
shaft.

Ngrel's first care was to send for M. Hennebeau, and to try to close
the pit; but it was already too late. The colliers who had rushed to
the Deux-Cent-Quarante settlement, as though pursued by the cracking
tubbing, had frightened the families; and bands of women, old men, and
little ones came running up, shaken by cries and sobs. They had to be
pushed back, and a line of overseers was formed to keep them off, for
they would have interfered with the operations. Many of the men who
had come up from the shaft remained there stupidly without thinking
of changing their clothes, riveted by fear before this terrible hole
in which they had nearly remained for ever. The women, rushing wildly
around them, implored them for names. Was So-and-so among them? and
that one? and this one? They did not know, they stammered; they
shuddered terribly, and made gestures like madmen, gestures which
seemed to be pushing away some abominable vision which was always
present to them. The crowd rapidly increased, and lamentations arose
from the roads. And up there on the pit-bank, in Bonnemort's cabin, on
the ground was seated a man, Souvarine, who had not gone away, who was
looking on.

"The names! the names!" cried the women, with voices choked by tears.

Ngrel appeared for a moment, and said hurriedly:

"As soon as we know the names they shall be given out, but nothing is
lost so far: every one will be saved. I am going down."

Then, silent with anguish, the crowd waited. The engineer, in fact,
with quiet courage was preparing to go down. He had had the cage
unfastened, giving orders to replace it at the end of the cable by a
tub; and as he feared that the water would extinguish his lamp, he had
another fastened beneath the tub, which would protect it.

Several captains, trembling and with white, disturbed faces, assisted
in these preparations.

"You will come with me, Dansaert," said Ngrel, abruptly.

Then, when he saw them all without courage, and that the head captain
was tottering, giddy with terror, he pushed him aside with a movement
of contempt.

"No, you will be in my way. I would rather go alone."

He was already in the narrow bucket, which swayed at the end of the
cable; and holding his lamp in one hand and the signal-cord in the
other, he shouted to the engine-man:

"Gently!"

The engine set the drums in movement, and Ngrel disappeared in the
gulf, from which the yells of the wretches below still arose.

At the upper part nothing had moved. He found that the tubbing here
was in good condition. Balanced in the middle of the shaft he lighted
up the walls as he turned round; the leaks between the joints were
so slight that his lamp did not suffer. But at three hundred metres,
when he reached the lower tubbing, the lamp was extinguished, as he
expected, for a jet had filled the tub. After that he was only able
to see by the hanging lamp which preceded him in the darkness, and,
in spite of his courage, he shuddered and turned pale in the face of
the horror of the disaster. A few pieces of timber alone remained;
the others had fallen in with their frames. Behind, enormous cavities
had been hollowed out, and the yellow sand, as fine as flour, was
flowing in considerable masses; while the waters of the Torrent,
that subterranean sea with its unknown tempests and shipwrecks, were
discharging in a flow like a weir. He went down lower, lost in the
midst of these chasms which continued to multiply, beaten and turned
round by the waterspout of the springs, so badly lighted by the red
star of the lamp moving on below, that he seemed to distinguish the
roads and squares of some destroyed town far away in the play of the
great moving shadows. No human work was any longer possible. His only
remaining hope was to attempt to save the men in peril. As he sank down
he heard the cries becoming louder, and he was obliged to stop; an
impassable obstacle barred the shaft--a mass of scaffolding, the broken
joists of the guides, the split brattices entangled with the metal-work
torn from the pump. As he looked on for a long time with aching heart,
the yelling suddenly ceased. No doubt, the rapid rise of the water had
forced the wretches to flee into the galleries, if, indeed, the flood
had not already filled their mouths.

Ngrel resigned himself to pulling the signal-cord as a sign to
draw up. Then he had himself stopped again. He could not conceive
the cause of this sudden accident. He wished to investigate it, and
examined those pieces of the tubbing which were still in place. At a
distance the tears and cuts in the wood had surprised him. His lamp,
drowned in dampness, was going out, and, touching with his fingers, he
clearly recognized the marks of the saw and of the wimble--the whole
abominable labour of destruction. Evidently this catastrophe had been
intentionally produced. He was stupefied, and the pieces of timber,
cracking and falling down with their frames in a last slide, nearly
carried him with them. His courage fled. The thought of the man who had
done that made his hair stand on end, and froze him with a supernatural
fear of evil, as though, mixed with the darkness, the men were still
there paying for his immeasurable crime. He shouted and shook the cord
furiously; and it was, indeed, time, for he perceived that the upper
tubbing, a hundred metres higher, was in its turn beginning to move.
The joints were opening, losing their oakum caulking, and streams were
rushing through. It was now only a question of hours before the tubbing
would all fall down.

At the surface M. Hennebeau was anxiously waiting for Ngrel.

"Well, what?" he asked.

But the engineer was choked, and could not speak; he felt faint.

"It is not possible; such a thing was never seen. Have you examined?"

He nodded with a cautious look. He refused to talk in the presence of
some captains who were listening, and led his uncle ten metres away,
and not thinking this far enough, drew still farther back; then, in a
low whisper, he at last told of the outrage, the torn and sawn planks,
the pit bleeding at the neck and groaning. Turning pale, the manager
also lowered his voice, with that instinctive need of silence in face
of the monstrosity of great orgies and great crimes. It was useless to
look as though they were trembling before the ten thousand Montsou men;
later on they would see. And they both continued whispering, overcome
at the thought that a man had had the courage to go down, to hang in
the midst of space, to risk his life twenty times over in his terrible
task. They could not even understand this mad courage in destruction;
they refused to believe, in spite of the evidence, just as we doubt
those stories of celebrated escapes of prisoners who fly through
windows thirty metres above the ground.

When M. Hennebeau came back to the captains a nervous spasm was drawing
his face. He made a gesture of despair, and gave orders that the mine
should be evacuated at once. It was a kind of funeral procession, in
silent abandonment, with glances thrown back at those great masses of
bricks, empty and still standing, but which nothing henceforth could
save.

And as the manager and the engineer came down last from the
receiving-room, the crowd met them with its clamour, repeating
obstinately:

"The names! the names! Tell us the names!"

Maheude was now there, among the women. She recollected the noise in
the night; her daughter and the lodger must have gone away together,
and they were certainly down at the bottom. And after having cried that
it was a good thing, that they deserved to stay there, the heartless
cowards, she had run up, and was standing in the first row, trembling
with anguish. Besides, she no longer dared to doubt; the discussion
going on around her informed her as to the names of those who were
down. Yes, yes, Catherine was among them, tienne also--a mate had seen
them. But there was not always agreement with regard to the others.
No, not this one; on the contrary, that one, perhaps Chaval, with
whom, however, a trammer declared that he had ascended. The Levaque
and Pierronne, although none of their people were in danger, cried out
and lamented as loudly as the others. Zacharie, who had come up among
the first, in spite of his inclination to make fun of everything had
weepingly kissed his wife and mother, and remained near the latter,
quivering, and showing an unexpected degree of affection for his
sister, refusing to believe that she was below so long as the bosses
made no authoritative statement.

"The names! the names! For pity's sake, the names!"

Ngrel, who was exhausted, shouted to the overseers:

"Can't you make them be still? It's enough to kill one with vexation!
We don't know the names!"

Two hours passed away in this manner. In the first terror no one had
thought of the other shaft at the old Rquillart mine, M. Hennebeau was
about to announce that the rescue would be attempted from that side,
when a rumour ran round: five men had just escaped the inundation by
climbing up the rotten ladders of the old unused passage, and Father
Mouque was named. This caused surprise, for no one knew he was below.
But the narrative of the five who had escaped increased the weeping;
fifteen mates had not been able to follow them, having gone astray, and
been walled up by falls. And it was no longer possible to assist them,
for there were already ten metres of water in Rquillart. All the names
were known, and the air was filled with the groans of a slaughtered
multitude.

"Will you make them be still?" Ngrel repeated furiously. "Make them
draw back! Yes, yes, to a hundred metres! There is danger; push them
back, push them back!"

It was necessary to struggle against these poor people. They were
imagining all sorts of misfortunes, and they had to be driven away so
that the deaths might be concealed; the captains explained to them that
the shaft would destroy the whole mine. This idea rendered them mute
with terror, and they at last allowed themselves to be driven back step
by step; the guards, however, who kept them back had to be doubled, for
they were fascinated by the spot and continually returned. Thousands of
people were hustling each other along the road; they were running up
from all the settlements, and even from Montsou. And the man above, on
the pit-bank, the fair man with the girlish face, smoked cigarettes to
occupy himself, keeping his clear eyes fixed on the pit.

Then the wait began. It was midday; no one had eaten, but no one moved
away. In the misty sky, of a dirty grey colour, rusty clouds were
slowly passing by. A big dog, behind Rasseneur's hedge, was barking
furiously without cessation, irritated by the living breath of the
crowd. And the crowd had gradually spread over the neighbouring ground,
forming a circle at a hundred metres round the pit. The Voreux arose in
the centre of the great space. There was not a soul there, not a sound;
it was a desert. The windows and the doors, left open, showed the
abandonment within; a forgotten ginger cat, divining the peril in this
solitude, jumped from a staircase and disappeared. No doubt the stoves
of the boilers were scarcely extinguished, for the tall brick chimney
gave out a light smoke beneath the dark clouds; while the weathercock
on the steeple creaked in the wind with a short, shrill cry, the only
melancholy voice of these vast buildings which were about to die.

At two o'clock nothing had moved, M. Hennebeau, Ngrel, and other
engineers who had hastened up, formed a group in black coats and hats
standing in front of the crowd; and they, too, did not move away,
though their legs were aching with fatigue, and they were feverish and
ill at their impotence in the face of such a disaster, only whispering
occasional words as though at a dying person's bedside. The upper
tubbing must nearly all have fallen in, for sudden echoing sounds could
be heard as of deep broken falls, succeeded by silence. The wound was
constantly enlarging; the landslip which had begun below was rising
and approaching the surface. Ngrel was seized by nervous impatience;
he wanted to see, and he was already advancing alone into this awful
void when he was seized by the shoulders. What was the good? he could
prevent nothing. An old miner, however, circumventing the overseers,
rushed into the shed; but he quietly reappeared, he had gone for his
sabots.

Three o'clock struck. Still nothing. A falling shower had soaked the
crowd, but they had not withdrawn a step. Rasseneur's dog had begun
to bark again. And it was at twenty minutes past three only that the
first shock was felt. The Voreux trembled, but continued solid and
upright. Then a second shock followed immediately, and a long cry came
from open mouths; the tarred screening-shed, after having tottered
twice, had fallen down with a terrible crash. Beneath the enormous
pressure the structures broke and jarred each other so powerfully that
sparks leapt out. From this moment the earth continued to tremble, the
shocks succeeded one another, subterranean downfalls, the rumbling of a
volcano in eruption. Afar the dog was no longer barking, but he howled
plaintively as though announcing the oscillations which he felt coming;
and the women, the children, all these people who were looking on,
could not keep back a clamour of distress at each of these blows which
shook them. In less than ten minutes the slate roof of the steeple fell
in, the receiving-room and the engine-rooms were split open, leaving a
considerable breach. Then the sounds ceased, the downfall stopped, and
there was again deep silence.

For an hour the Voreux remained thus, broken into, as though bombarded
by an army of barbarians. There was no more crying out; the enlarged
circle of spectators merely looked on. Beneath the piled-up beams of
the sifting-shed, fractured tipping cradles could be made out with
broken and twisted hoppers. But the rubbish had especially accumulated
at the receiving-room, where there had been a rain of bricks, and large
portions of wall and masses of plaster had fallen in. The iron scaffold
which bore the pulleys had bent, half-buried in the pit; a cage was
still suspended, a torn cable-end was hanging; then there was a hash
of trams, metal plates, and ladders. By some chance the lamp cabin
remained standing, exhibiting on the left its bright rows of little
lamps. And at the end of its disembowelled chamber, the engine could be
seen seated squarely on its massive foundation of masonry; its copper
was shining and its huge steel limbs seemed to possess indestructible
muscles. The enormous crank, bent in the air, looked like the powerful
knee of some giant quietly reposing in his strength.

After this hour of respite, M. Hennebeau's hopes began to rise. The
movement of the soil must have come to an end, and there would be
some chance of saving the engine and the remainder of the buildings.
But he would not yet allow any one to approach, considering another
half-hour's patience desirable. This waiting became unbearable; the
hope increased the anguish and all hearts were beating quickly. A dark
cloud, growing large at the horizon, hastened the twilight, a sinister
dayfall over this wreck of earth's tempests. Since seven o'clock they
had been there without moving or eating.

And suddenly, as the engineers were cautiously advancing, a supreme
convulsion of the soil put them to flight. Subterranean detonations
broke out; a whole monstrous artillery was cannonading in the gulf. At
the surface, the last buildings were tipped over and crushed. At first
a sort of whirlpool carried away the rubbish from the sifting-shed and
the receiving-room. Next, the boiler building burst and disappeared.
Then it was the low square tower, where the pumping-engine was
groaning, which fell on its face like a man mown down by a bullet.
And then a terrible thing was seen; the engine, dislocated from its
massive foundation, with broken limbs was struggling against death; it
moved, it straightened its crank, its giant's knee, as though to rise;
but, crushed and swallowed up, it was dying. The chimney alone, thirty
metres high, still remained standing, though shaken, like a mast in the
tempest. It was thought that it would be crushed to fragments and fly
to powder, when suddenly it sank in one block, drunk down by the earth,
melted like a colossal candle; and nothing was left, not even the point
of the lightning conductor. It was done for; the evil beast crouching
in this hole, gorged with human flesh, was no longer breathing with its
thick, long respiration. The Voreux had been swallowed whole by the
abyss.

The crowd rushed away yelling. The women hid their eyes as they ran.
Terror drove the men along like a pile of dry leaves. They wished not
to shout and they shouted, with swollen breasts, and arms in the air,
before the immense hole which had been hollowed out. This crater, as
of an extinct volcano, fifteen metres deep, extended from the road
to the canal for a space of at least forty metres. The whole square
of the mine had followed the buildings, the gigantic platforms, the
foot-bridges with their rails, a complete train of trams, three wagons;
without counting the wood supply, a forest of cut timber, gulped
down like straw. At the bottom it was only possible to distinguish a
confused mass of beams, bricks, iron, plaster, frightful remains, piled
up, entangled, soiled in the fury of the catastrophe. And the hole
became larger, cracks started from the edges, reaching afar, across the
fields. A fissure ascended as far as Rasseneur's bar, and his front
wall had cracked. Would the settlement itself pass into it? How far
ought they to flee to reach shelter at the end of this abominable day,
beneath this leaden cloud which also seemed about to crush the earth?

A cry of pain escaped Ngrel. M. Hennebeau, who had drawn back, was
in tears. The disaster was not complete; one bank of the canal gave
way, and the canal emptied itself like one bubbling sheet through one
of the cracks. It disappeared there, falling like a cataract down a
deep valley. The mine drank down this river; the galleries would now
be submerged for years. Soon the crater was filled and a lake of muddy
water occupied the place where once stood the Voreux, like one of
those lakes beneath which sleep accursed towns. There was a terrified
silence, and nothing now could be heard but the fall of this water
rumbling in the bowels of the earth.

Then on the shaken pit-bank Souvarine rose up. He had recognized
Maheude and Zacharie sobbing before this downfall, the weight of which
was so heavy on the heads of the wretches who were in agony beneath.
And he threw down his last cigarette; he went away, without looking
back, into the now dark night. Afar his shadow diminished and mingled
with the darkness. He was going over there, to the unknown. He was
going tranquilly to extermination, wherever there might be dynamite
to blow up towns and men. He will be there, without doubt, when the
middle class in agony shall hear the pavement of the streets bursting
up beneath their feet.




CHAPTER IV


On the night that followed the collapse of the Voreux M. Hennebeau
started for Paris, wishing to inform the directors in person before the
newspapers published the news. And when he returned on the following
day he appeared to be quite calm, with his usual correct administrative
air. He had evidently freed himself from responsibility; he did not
appear to have decreased in favour. On the contrary, the decree
appointing him officer of the Legion of Honour was signed twenty-four
hours afterwards.

But if the manager remained safe, the Company was tottering beneath the
terrible blow. It was not the few million francs that had been lost,
it was the wound in the flank, the deep incessant fear of the morrow
in face of this massacre of one of their mines. The Company was so
impressed that once more it felt the need of silence. What was the good
of stirring up this abomination? If the villain were discovered, why
make a martyr of him in order that his awful heroism might turn other
heads, and give birth to a long line of incendiaries and murderers?
Besides, the real culprit was not suspected. The Company came to think
that there was an army of accomplices, not being able to believe that
a single man could have had courage and strength for such a task; and
it was precisely this thought which weighed on them, this thought of
an ever-increasing threat to the existence of their mines. The manager
had received orders to organize a vast system of espionage, and then
to dismiss quietly, one by one, the dangerous men who were suspected
of having had a hand in the crime. They contented themselves with this
method of purification--a prudent and politic method.

There was only one immediate dismissal, that of Dansaert, the head
captain. Ever since the scandal at Pierronne's house he had become
impossible. A pretext was made of his attitude in danger, the cowardice
of a captain abandoning his men. This was also a prudent sop thrown to
the miners, who hated him.

Among the public, however, many rumours had circulated, and the
directors had to send a letter of correction to one newspaper,
contradicting a story in which mention was made of a barrel of powder
lighted by the strikers. After a rapid inquiry the Government inspector
had concluded that there had been a natural rupture of the tubbing,
occasioned by the piling up of the soil; and the Company had preferred
to be silent, and to accept the blame of a lack of superintendence. In
the Paris press, after the third day, the catastrophe had served to
increase the stock of general news; nothing was talked of but the men
perishing at the bottom of the mine, and the telegrams published every
morning were eagerly read. At Montsou people grew pale and speechless
at the very name of the Voreux, and a legend had formed which made the
boldest tremble as they whispered it. The whole country showed great
pity for the victims; visits were organized to the destroyed pit, and
whole families hastened up to shudder at the ruins which lay so heavily
over the heads of the buried wretches.

Deneulin, who had been appointed divisional engineer, came into the
midst of the disaster on beginning his duties; and his first care was
to turn the canal back into its bed, for this torrent increased the
damage every hour. Extensive works were necessary, and he at once
set a hundred men to construct a dyke. Twice over the impetuosity of
the stream carried away the first dams. Now pumps were set up and a
furious struggle was going on; step by step the vanished soil was being
violently reconquered.

But the rescue of the engulfed miners was a still more absorbing work.
Ngrel was appointed to attempt a supreme effort, and arms were not
lacking to help him; all the colliers rushed to offer themselves in an
outburst of brotherhood. They forgot the strike, they did not trouble
themselves at all about payment; they might get nothing, they only
asked to risk their lives as soon as there were mates in danger of
death. They were all there with their tools, quivering as they waited
to know where they ought to strike. Many of them, sick with fright
after the accident, shaken by nervous tremors, soaked in cold sweats,
and the prey of continual nightmares, got up in spite of everything,
and were as eager as any in their desire to fight against the earth, as
though they had a revenge to take on it. Unfortunately, the difficulty
began when the question arose, What could be done? how could they go
down? from what side could they attack the rocks?

Ngrel's opinion was that not one of the unfortunate people was alive;
the fifteen had surely perished, drowned or suffocated. But in these
mine catastrophes the rule is always to assume that buried men are
alive, and he acted on this supposition. The first problem which he
proposed to himself was to decide where they could have taken refuge.
The captains and old miners whom he consulted were agreed on one
point: in the face of the rising water the men had certainly come up
from gallery to gallery to the highest cuttings, so that they were,
without doubt, driven to the end of some upper passages. This agreed
with Father Mouque's information, and his confused narrative even
gave reason to suppose that in the wild flight the band had separated
into smaller groups, leaving fugitives on the road at every level.
But the captains were not unanimous when the discussion of possible
attempts at rescue arose. As the passages nearest to the surface were
a hundred and fifty metres down, there could be no question of sinking
a shaft. Rquillart remained the one means of access, the only point
by which they could approach. The worst was that the old pit, now
also inundated, no longer communicated with the Voreux; and above
the level of the water only a few ends of galleries belonging to the
first level were left free. The pumping process would require years,
and the best plan would be to visit these galleries and ascertain if
any of them approached the submerged passages at the end of which the
distressed miners were suspected to be. Before logically arriving at
this point, much discussion had been necessary to dispose of a crowd of
impracticable plans.

Ngrel now began to stir up the dust of the archives; he discovered
the old plans of the two pits, studied them, and decided on the points
at which their investigations ought to be carried on. Gradually this
hunt excited him; he was, in his turn, seized by a fever of devotion,
in spite of his ironical indifference to men and things. The first
difficulty was in going down at Rquillart; it was necessary to clear
out the rubbish from the mouth of the shaft, to cut down the mountain
ash, and raze the sloes and the hawthorns; they had also to repair
the ladders. Then they began to feel around. The engineer, having
gone down with ten workmen, made them strike the iron of their tools
against certain parts of the seam which he pointed out to them; and in
deep silence they each placed an ear to the coal, listening for any
distant blows to reply. But they went in vain through every practicable
gallery; no echo returned to them. Their embarrassment increased. At
what spot should they cut into the bed? Towards whom should they go,
since no once appeared to be there? They persisted in seeking, however,
notwithstanding the exhaustion produced by their growing anxiety.

On the first day, Maheude came in the morning to Rquillart. She sat
down on a beam in front of the shaft, and did not stir from it till
evening. When a man came up, she rose and questioned him with her eyes:
Nothing? No, nothing! And she sat down again, and waited still, without
a word, with hard, fixed face. Jeanlin also, seeing that his den was
invaded, prowled around with the frightened air of a beast of prey
whose burrow will betray his booty. He thought of the little soldier
lying beneath the rocks, fearing lest they should trouble his sound
sleep; but that side of the mine was beneath the water, and, besides,
their investigations were directed more to the left, in the west
gallery. At first, Philomne had also come, accompanying Zacharie, who
was one of the gang; then she became wearied at catching cold, without
need or result, and went back to the settlement, dragging through her
days, a limp, indifferent woman, occupied from morning to night in
coughing. Zacharie on the contrary, lived for nothing else; he would
have devoured the soil to get back his sister. At night he shouted out
that he saw, her, he heard her, very lean from hunger, her chest sore
with calling for help. Twice he had tried to dig without orders, saying
that it was there, that he was sure of it. The engineer would not let
him go down any more, and he would not go away from the pit, from which
he was driven off; he could not even sit down and wait near his mother,
he was so deeply stirred by the need to act, which drove him constantly
on.

It was the third day. Ngrel, in despair, had resolved to abandon the
attempt in the evening. At midday, after lunch, when he came back with
his men to make one last effort, he was surprised to see Zacharie, red
and gesticulating, come out of the mine shouting:

"She's there! She's replied to me! Come along, quickly!"

He had slid down the ladders, in spite of the watchman, and was
declaring that he had heard hammering over there, in the first passage
of the Guillaume seam.

"But we have already been twice in that direction," Ngrel observed,
sceptically. "Anyhow, we'll go and see."

Maheude had risen, and had to be prevented from going down. She waited,
standing at the edge of the shaft, gazing down into the darkness of the
hole.

Ngrel, down below, himself struck three blows, at long intervals. He
then applied his ear to the coal, cautioning the workers to be very
silent. Not a sound reached him, and he shook his head; evidently
the poor lad was dreaming. In a fury, Zacharie struck in his turn,
and listened anew with bright eyes, and limbs trembling with joy.
Then the other workmen tried the experiment, one after the other,
and all grew animated, hearing the distant reply quite clearly. The
engineer was astonished; he again applied his ear, and was at last
able to catch a sound of aerial softness, a rhythmical roll scarcely
to be distinguished, the well-known cadence beaten by the miners
when they are fighting against the coal in the midst of danger. The
coal transmits the sound with crystalline limpidity for a very great
distance. A captain who was there estimated that the thickness of the
block which separated them from their mates could not be less than
fifty metres. But it seemed as if they could already stretch out a hand
to them, and general gladness broke out. Ngrel decided to begin at
once the work of approach.

When Zacharie, up above, saw Maheude again, they embraced each other.

"It won't do to get excited," Pierronne, who had come for a visit of
inquisitiveness, was cruel enough to say. "If Catherine isn't there, it
would be such a grief afterwards!"

That was true; Catherine might be somewhere else.

"Just leave me alone, will you? Damn it!" cried Zacharie in a rage.
"She's there; I know it!"

Maheude sat down again in silence, with motionless face, continuing to
wait.

As soon as the story was spread at Montsou, a new crowd arrived.
Nothing was to be seen; but they remained there all the same, and had
to be kept at a distance. Down below, the work went on day and night.
For fear of meeting an obstacle, the engineer had had three descending
galleries opened in the seam, converging to the point where the
enclosed miners were supposed to be. Only one pikeman could hew at the
coal on the narrow face of the tube; he was relieved every two hours,
and the coal piled in baskets was passed up, from hand to hand, by a
chain of men, increased as the hole was hollowed out. The work at first
proceeded very quickly; they did six metres a day.

Zacharie had secured a place among the workers chosen for the hewing.
It was a post of honour which was disputed over, and he became furious
when they wished to relieve him after his regulation two hours of
labour. He robbed his mates of their turn, and refused to let go the
pick. His gallery was soon in advance of the others. He fought against
the coal so fiercely that his breath could be heard coming from the
tube like the roar of a forge within his breast. When he came out,
black and muddy, dizzy with fatigue, he fell to the ground and had to
be wrapped up in a covering. Then, still tottering, he plunged back
again, and the struggle began anew--the low, deep blows, the stifled
groans, the victorious fury of massacre. The worst was that the coal
now became hard; he twice broke his tool, and was exasperated that
he could not get on so fast. He suffered also from the heat, which
increased with every metre of advance, and was unbearable at the end of
this narrow hole where the air could not circulate. A hand ventilator
worked well, but aeration was so inadequate that on three occasions it
was necessary to take out fainting hewers who were being asphyxiated.

Ngrel lived below with his men. His meals were sent down to him, and
he sometimes slept for a couple of hours on a truss of straw, rolled
in a cloak. The one thing that kept them up was the supplication of
the wretches beyond, the call which was sounded ever more distinctly
to hasten on the rescue. It now rang very clearly with a musical
sonority, as though struck on the plates of a harmonica. It led them
on; they advanced to this crystalline sound as men advance to the sound
of cannon in battle. Every time that a pikeman was relieved, Ngrel
went down and struck, then applied his ear; and every time, so far,
the reply had come, rapid and urgent. He had no doubt remaining; they
were advancing in the right direction, but with what fatal slowness!
They would never arrive soon enough. On the first two days they had
indeed hewn through thirteen metres; but on the third day they fell to
five, and then on the fourth to three. The coal was becoming closer
and harder, to such an extent that they now with difficulty struck
through two metres. On the ninth day, after superhuman efforts, they
had advanced thirty-two metres, and calculated that some twenty must
still be left before them. For the prisoners it was the beginning of
the twelfth day; twelve times over had they passed twenty-four hours
without bread, without fire, in that icy darkness! This awful idea
moistened the eyelids and stiffened the arm of the workers. It seemed
impossible that Christians could live longer. The distant blows had
become weaker since the previous day, and every moment they trembled
lest they should stop.

Maheude came regularly every morning to sit at the mouth of the
shaft. In her arms she brought Estelle, who could not remain alone
from morning to night. Hour by hour she followed the workers, sharing
their hopes and fears. There was feverish expectation among the groups
standing around, and even as far as Montsou, with endless discussion.
Every heart in the district was beating down there beneath the earth.

On the ninth day, at the breakfast hour, no reply came from Zacharie
when he was called for the relay. He was like a madman, working on
furiously with oaths. Ngrel, who had come up for a moment, was not
there to make him obey, and only a captain and three miners were below.
No doubt Zacharie, infuriated with the feeble vacillating light,
which delayed his work, committed the imprudence of opening his lamp,
although severe orders had been given, for leakages of fire-damp had
taken place, and the gas remained in enormous masses in these narrow,
unventilated passages. Suddenly, a roar of thunder was heard, and a
spout of fire darted out of the tube as from the mouth of a cannon
charged with grapeshot. Everything flamed up and the air caught fire
like powder, from one end of the galleries to the other. This torrent
of flame carried away the captain and three workers, ascended the pit,
and leapt up to the daylight in an eruption which split the rocks and
the ruins around. The inquisitive fled, and Maheude arose, pressing the
frightened Estelle to her breast.

When Ngrel and the men came back they were seized by a terrible
rage. They struck their heels on the earth as on a stepmother who was
killing her children at random in the imbecile whims of her cruelty.
They were devoting themselves, they were coming to the help of their
mates, and still they must lose some of their men! After three long
hours of effort and danger they reached the galleries once more, and
the melancholy ascent of the victims took place. Neither the captain
nor the workers were dead, but they were covered by awful wounds which
gave out an odour of grilled flesh; they had drunk of fire, the burns
had got into their throats, and they constantly moaned and prayed to be
finished off. One of the three miners was the man who had smashed the
pump at Gaston-Marie with a final blow of the shovel during the strike;
the two others still had scars on their hands, and grazed, torn fingers
from the energy with which they had thrown bricks at the soldiers. The
pale and shuddering crowd took off their hats when they were carried by.

Maheude stood waiting. Zacharie's body at last appeared. The clothes
were burnt, the body was nothing but black charcoal, calcined and
unrecognizable. The head had been smashed by the explosion and
no longer existed. And when these awful remains were placed on a
stretcher, Maheude followed them mechanically, her burning eyelids
without a tear. With Estelle drowsily lying in her arms, she went
along, a tragic figure, her hair lashed by the wind. At the settlement
Philomne seemed stupid; her eyes were turned into fountains and she
was quickly relieved. But the mother had already returned with the same
step to Rquillart; she had accompanied her son, she was returning to
wait for her daughter.

Three more days passed by. The rescue work had been resumed amid
incredible difficulties. The galleries of approach had fortunately not
fallen after the fire-damp explosion; but the air was so heavy and
so vitiated that more ventilators had to be installed. Every twenty
minutes the pikemen relieved one another. They were advancing; scarcely
two metres separated them from their mates. But now they worked feeling
cold at their hearts, striking hard only out of vengeance; for the
noises had ceased, and the low, clear cadence of the call no longer
sounded. It was the twelfth day of their labours, the fifteenth since
the catastrophe; and since the morning there had been a death-like
silence.

The new accident increased the curiosity at Montsou, and the
inhabitants organized excursions with such spirit that the Grgoires
decided to follow the fashion. They arranged a party, and it was agreed
that they should go to the Voreux in their carriage, while Madame
Hennebeau took Lucie and Jeanne there in hers. Deneulin would show them
over his yards and then they would return by Rquillart, where Ngrel
would tell them the exact state of things in the galleries, and if
there was still hope. Finally, they would dine together in the evening.

When the Grgoires and their daughter Ccile arrived at the ruined
mine, toward three o'clock, they found Madame Hennebeau already there,
in a sea-blue dress, protecting herself under her parasol from the pale
February sun. The warmth of spring was in the clear sky. M. Hennebeau
was there with Deneulin, and she was listening, with listless ear, to
the account which the latter gave her of the efforts which had been
made to dam up the canal. Jeanne, who always carried a sketch-book with
her, began to draw, carried away by the horror of the subject; while
Lucie, seated beside her on the remains of a wagon, was crying out with
pleasure, and finding it awfully jolly. The incomplete dam allowed
numerous leaks, and frothy streams fell in a cascade down the enormous
hole of the engulfed mine. The crater was being emptied, however, and
the water, drunk by the earth, was sinking, and revealing the fearful
ruin at the bottom. Beneath the tender azure of this beautiful day
there lay a sewer, the ruins of a town drowned and melted in mud.

"And people come out of their way to see that!" exclaimed M. Grgoire,
disillusioned.

Ccile, rosy with health and glad to breathe so pure an air, was
cheerfully joking, while Madame Hennebeau made a little grimace of
repugnance as she murmured:

"The fact is, this is not pretty at all."

The two engineers laughed. They tried to interest the visitors, taking
them round and explaining to them the working of the pumps and the
manipulation of the stamper which drove in the piles. But the ladies
became anxious. They shuddered when they knew that the pumps would have
to work for six or seven years before the shaft was reconstructed and
all the water exhausted from the mine. No, they would rather think of
something else; this destruction was only good to give bad dreams.

"Let us go," said Madame Hennebeau, turning towards her carriage.

Lucie and Jeanne protested. What! so soon! and the drawing which was
not finished. They wanted to remain; their father would bring them to
dinner in the evening.

M. Hennebeau alone took his place with his wife in the carriage, for he
wished to question Ngrel.

"Very well! go on before," said M. Grgoire. "We will follow you;
we have a little visit of five minutes to make over there at the
settlement. Go on, go on! we shall be at Rquillart as soon as you."

He got up behind Madame Grgoire and Ccile, and while the other
carriage went along by the canal, theirs gently ascended the slope.

Their excursion was to be completed by a visit of charity. Zacharie's
death had filled them with pity for this tragical Maheu family, about
whom the whole country was talking. They had no pity for the father,
that brigand, that slayer of soldiers, who had to be struck down like
a wolf. But the mother touched them, that poor woman who had just lost
her son after having lost her husband, and whose daughter was perhaps a
corpse beneath the earth; to say nothing of an invalid grandfather, a
child who was lame as the result of a landslip, and a little girl who
died of starvation during the strike. So that, though this family had
in part deserved its misfortunes by the detestable spirit it had shown,
they had resolved to assert the breadth of their charity, their desire
for forgetfulness and conciliation, by themselves bringing on alms. Two
parcels, carefully wrapped up, had been placed beneath a seat of the
carriage.

An old woman pointed out to the coachman Maheude's house, No. 16 in
the second block. But when the Grgoires alighted with the parcels,
they knocked in vain; at last they struck their fists against the door,
still without reply; the house echoed mournfully, like a house emptied
by grief, frozen and dark, long since abandoned.

"There's no one there," said Ccile, disappointed. "What a nuisance!
What shall we do with all this?"

Suddenly the door of the next house opened, and the Levaque woman
appeared.

"Oh, sir! I beg pardon, ma'am. Excuse me, miss. It's the neighbour that
you want? She's not there; she's at Rquillart."

With a flow of words she told them the story, repeating to them that
people must help one another, and that she was keeping Lnore and
Henri in her house to allow the mother to go and wait over there. Her
eyes had fallen on the parcels, and she began to talk about her poor
daughter, who had become a widow, displaying her own wretchedness,
while her eyes shone with covetousness. Then, in a hesitating way, she
muttered:

"I've got the key. If the lady and gentleman would really like---- The
grandfather is there."

The Grgoires looked at her in stupefaction. What! The grandfather was
there! But no one had replied. He was sleeping, then? And when the
Levaque made up her mind to open the door, what they saw stopped them
on the threshold. Bonnemort was there alone, with large fixed eyes,
nailed to his chair in front of the cold fireplace. Around him the room
appeared larger without the clock or the polished deal furniture which
formerly animated it; there only remained against the green crudity of
the walls the portraits of the Emperor and Empress, whose rosy lips
were smiling with official benevolence. The old man did not stir nor
wink his eyelids beneath the sudden light from the door; he seemed
imbecile, as though he had not seen all these people come in. At his
feet lay his plate, garnished with ashes, such as is placed for cats
for ordure.

"Don't mind if he's not very polite," said the Levaque woman,
obligingly. "Seems he's broken something in his brain. It's a fortnight
since he left off speaking."

But Bonnemort was shaken by some agitation, a deep scraping which
seemed to arise from his belly, and he expectorated into the plate a
thick black expectoration. The ashes were soaked into a coaly mud,
all the coal of the mine which he drew from his chest. He had already
resumed his immobility. He stirred no more, except at intervals, to
spit.

Uneasy, and with stomachs turned, the Grgoires endeavoured to utter a
few friendly and encouraging words.

"Well, my good man," said the father, "you have a cold, then?"

The old man, with his eyes to the wall, did not turn his head. And a
heavy silence fell once more.

"They ought to make you a little gruel," added the mother.

He preserved his mute stiffness.

"I say, papa," murmured Ccile, "they certainly told us he was an
invalid; only we did not think of it afterwards--"

She interrupted herself, much embarrassed. After having placed on the
table a _pot-au-feu_ and two bottles of wine, she undid the second
parcel and drew from it a pair of enormous boots. It was the present
intended for the grandfather, and she held one boot in each hand, in
confusion, contemplating the poor man's swollen feet, which would never
walk again.

"Eh! they come a little late, don't they, my worthy fellow?" said M.
Grgoire again, to enliven the situation. "It doesn't matter, they're
always useful."

Bonnemort neither heard nor replied, with his terrible face as cold and
as hard as a stone.

Then Ccile furtively placed the boots against the wall. But in spite
of her precautions the nails clanked; and those enormous boots stood
oppressively in the room.

"He won't say thank you," said the Levaque woman, who had cast a look
of deep envy on the boots. "Might as well give a pair of spectacles to
a duck, asking your pardon."

She went on; she was trying to draw the Grgoires into her own house,
where she hoped to gain their pity. At last she thought of a pretext;
she praised Henri and Lnore, who were so good, so gentle, and so
intelligent, answering like angels the questions that they were asked.
They would tell the lady and gentleman all that they wished to know.

"Will you come for a moment, my child?" asked the father, glad to get
away.

"Yes, I'll follow you," she replied.

Ccile remained alone with Bonnemort. What kept her there trembling
and fascinated, was the thought that she seemed to recognize this old
man: where then had she met this square livid face, tattooed with coal?
Suddenly she remembered; she saw again a mob of shouting people who
surrounded her, and she felt cold hands pressing her neck. It was he;
she saw the man again; she looked at his hands placed on his knees,
the hands of an invalid workman whose whole strength is in his wrists,
still firm in spite of age. Gradually Bonnemort seemed to awake, he
perceived her and examined her in his turn. A flame mounted to his
cheeks, a nervous spasm drew his mouth, from which flowed a thin streak
of black saliva. Fascinated, they remained opposite each other--she
flourishing, plump, and fresh from the long idleness and sated comfort
of her race; he swollen with water, with the pitiful ugliness of a
foundered beast, destroyed from father to son by a century of work and
hunger.

At the end of ten minutes, when the Grgoires, surprised at not seeing
Ccile, came back into the Maheus' house, they uttered a terrible cry.
Their daughter was lying on the ground, with livid face, strangled. At
her neck fingers had left the red imprint of a giant's hand. Bonnemort,
tottering on his dead legs, had fallen beside her without power to
rise. His hands were still hooked, and he looked round with his
imbecile air and large open eyes. In his fall he had broken his plate,
the ashes were spread round, the mud of the black expectoration had
stained the floor; while the great pair of boots, safe and sound, stood
side by side against the wall.

It was never possible to establish the exact facts. Why had Ccile come
near? How could Bonnemort, nailed to his chair, have been able to seize
her throat? Evidently, when he held her, he must have become furious,
constantly pressing, overthrown with her, and stifling her cries to the
last groan. Not a sound, not a moan had traversed the thin partition to
the neighbouring house. It seemed to be an outbreak of sudden madness,
a longing to murder before this white young neck. Such savagery was
stupefying in an old invalid, who had lived like a worthy man, an
obedient brute, opposed to new ideas. What rancour, unknown to himself,
by some slow process of poisoning, had risen from his bowels to his
brain? The horror of it led to the conclusion that he was unconscious,
that it was the crime of an idiot.

The Grgoires, meanwhile, on their knees, were sobbing, choked with
grief. Their idolized daughter, that daughter desired so long, on whom
they had lavished all their goods, whom they used to watch sleeping,
on tiptoe, whom they never thought sufficiently well nourished, never
sufficiently plump! It was the downfall of their very life; what was
the good of living, now that they would have to live without her?

The Levaque woman in distraction cried:

"Ah, the old beggar! what's he done there? Who would have expected such
a thing? And Maheude, who won't come back till evening! Shall I go and
fetch her?"

The father and mother were crushed, and did not reply.

"Eh? It will be better. I'll go."

But, before going, the Levaque woman looked at the boots. The whole
settlement was excited, and a crowd was already hustling around.
Perhaps they would get stolen. And then the Maheus had no man, now,
to put them on. She quietly carried them away. They would just fit
Bouteloup's feet.

At Rquillart the Hennebeaus, with Ngrel, waited a long time for the
Grgoires. Ngrel, who had come up from the pit, gave details. They
hoped to communicate that very evening with the prisoners, but they
would certainly find nothing but corpses, for the death-like silence
continued. Behind the engineer, Maheude, seated on the beam, was
listening with white face, when the Levaque woman came up and told her
the old man's strange deed. And she only made a sweeping gesture of
impatience and irritation. She followed her, however.

Madame Hennebeau was much affected. What an abomination! That poor
Ccile, so merry that very day, so full of life an hour before! M.
Hennebeau had to lead his wife for a moment into old Mouque's hovel.
With his awkward hands he unfastened her dress, troubled by the odour
of musk which her open bodice exhaled. And as with streaming tears she
clasped Ngrel, terrified at this death which cut short the marriage,
the husband watched them lamenting together, and was delivered from one
anxiety. This misfortune would arrange everything; he preferred to keep
his nephew for fear of his coachman.




CHAPTER V


At the bottom of the shaft the abandoned wretches were yelling with
terror. The water now came up to their hips. The noise of the torrent
dazed them, the final falling in of the tubbing sounded like the last
crack of doom; and their bewilderment was completed by the neighing of
the horses shut up in the stable, the terrible, unforgettable death-cry
of an animal that is being slaughtered.

Mouque had let go Bataille. The old horse was there, trembling, with
its dilated eye fixed on this water which was constantly rising. The
pit-eye was rapidly filling; the greenish flood slowly enlarged under
the red gleam of the three lamps which were still burning under the
roof. And suddenly, when he felt this ice soaking his coat, he set out
in a furious gallop, and was engulfed and lost at the end of one of the
haulage galleries.

Then there was a general rush, the men following the beast.

"Nothing more to be done in this damned hole!" shouted Mouque. "We must
try at Rquillart."

The idea that they might get out by the old neighbouring pit if
they arrived before the passage was cut off, now carried them away.
The twenty hustled one another as they went in single file, holding
their lamps in the air so that the water should not extinguish them.
Fortunately, the gallery rose with an imperceptible slope, and they
proceeded for two hundred metres, struggling against the flood, which
was not now gaining on them. Sleeping beliefs reawakened in these
distracted souls; they invoked the earth, for it was the earth that
was avenging herself, discharging the blood from the vein because they
had cut one of her arteries. An old man stammered forgotten prayers,
bending his thumbs backwards to appease the evil spirits of the mine.

But at the first turning disagreement broke out; the groom proposed
turning to the left, others declared that they could make a short cut
by going to the right. A minute was lost.

"Well, die there! what the devil does it matter to me?" Chaval brutally
exclaimed. "I go this way."

He turned to the right, and two mates followed him. The others
continued to rush behind Father Mouque, who had grown up at the bottom
of Rquillart. He himself hesitated, however, not knowing where to
turn. They lost their heads; even the old men could no longer recognize
the passages, which lay like a tangled skein before them. At every
bifurcation they were pulled up short by uncertainty, and yet they had
to decide.

tienne was running last, delayed by Catherine, who was paralysed by
fatigue and fear. He would have gone to the right with Chaval, for he
thought that the better road; but he had not, preferring to part from
Chaval. The rush continued, however; some of the mates had gone from
their side, and only seven were left behind old Mouque.

"Hang on to my neck and I will carry you," said tienne to the young
girl, seeing her grow weak.

"No, let me be," she murmured. "I can't do more; I would rather die at
once."

They delayed and were left fifty metres behind; he was lifting her,
in spite of her resistance, when the gallery was suddenly stopped up;
an enormous block fell in and separated them from the others. The
inundation was already soaking the soil, which was shifting on every
side. They had to retrace their steps; then they no longer knew in what
direction they were going. There was an end of all hope of escaping by
Rquillart. Their only remaining hope was to gain the upper workings,
from which they might perhaps be delivered if the water sank.

tienne at last recognized the Guillaume seam.

"Good!" he exclaimed. "Now I know where we are. By God! we were in the
right road; but we may go to the devil now! Here, let us go straight
on; we will climb up the passage."

The flood was beating against their breasts, and they walked very
slowly. As long as they had light they did not despair, and they blew
out one of the lamps to economize the oil, meaning to empty it into the
other lamp. They had reached the chimney passage, when a noise behind
made them turn. Was it some mates, then, who had also found the road
barred and were returning? A roaring sound came from afar; they could
not understand this tempest which approached them, spattering foam. And
they cried out when they saw a gigantic whitish mass coming out of the
shadow and trying to rejoin them between the narrow timbering in which
it was being crushed.

It was Bataille. On leaving the pit-eye he had wildly galloped along
the dark galleries. He seemed to know his road in this subterranean
town which he had inhabited for eleven years, and his eyes saw clearly
in the depths of the eternal night in which he had lived. He galloped
on and on, bending his head, drawing up his feet, passing through these
narrow tubes in the earth, filled by his great body. Road succeeded
to road, and the forked turnings were passed without any hesitation.
Where was he going? Over there, perhaps, towards that vision of his
youth, to the mill where he had been born on the bank of the Scarpe, to
the confused recollection of the sun burning in the air like a great
lamp. He desired to live, his beast's memory awoke; the longing to
breathe once more the air of the plains drove him straight onwards to
the discovery of that hole, the exit beneath the warm sun into light.
Rebellion carried away his ancient resignation; this pit was murdering
him after having blinded him. The water which pursued him was lashing
him on the flanks and biting him on the crupper. But as he went deeper
in, the galleries became narrower, the roofs lower, and the walls
protruded. He galloped on in spite of everything, grazing himself,
leaving shreds of his limbs on the timber. From every side the mine
seemed to be pressing on to him to take him and to stifle him.

Then tienne and Catherine, as he came near them, perceived that he
was strangling between the rocks. He had stumbled and broken his two
front legs. With a last effort, he dragged himself a few metres, but
his flanks could not pass; he remained hemmed in and garrotted by the
earth. With his bleeding head stretched out, he still sought for some
crack with his great troubled eyes. The water was rapidly covering
him; he began to neigh with that terrible prolonged death-rattle with
which the other horses had already died in the stable. It was a sight
of fearful agony, this old beast shattered and motionless, struggling
at this depth, far from the daylight. The flood was drowning his mane,
and his cry of distress never ceased; he uttered it more hoarsely, with
his large open mouth stretched out. There was a last rumble, the hollow
sound of a cask which is being filled; then deep silence fell.

"Oh, my God! take me away!" Catherine sobbed. "Ah, my God! I'm afraid;
I don't want to die. Take me away! take me away!"

She had seen death. The fallen shaft, the inundated mine, nothing had
seized her with such terror as this clamour of Bataille in agony. And
she constantly heard it; her ears were ringing with it; all her flesh
was shuddering with it.

"Take me away! take me away!"

tienne had seized her and lifted her; it was, indeed, time. They
ascended the chimney passage, soaked to the shoulders. He was obliged
to help her, for she had no strength to cling to the timber. Three
times over he thought that she was slipping from him and falling back
into that deep sea of which the tide was roaring beneath them. However,
they were able to breathe for a few minutes when they reached the first
gallery, which was still free. The water reappeared, and they had to
hoist themselves up again. And for hours this ascent continued, the
flood chasing them from passage to passage, and constantly forcing them
to ascend. At the sixth level a respite rendered them feverish with
hope, and it seemed that the waters were becoming stationary. But a
more rapid rise took place, and they had to climb to the seventh and
then to the eighth level. Only one remained, and when they had reached
it they anxiously watched each centimetre by which the water gained
on them. If it did not stop they would then die like the old horse,
crushed against the roof, and their chests filled by the flood.

Landslips echoed every moment. The whole mine was shaken, and its
distended bowels burst with the enormous flood which gorged them. At
the end of the galleries the air, driven back, pressed together and
crushed, exploded terribly amid split rocks and overthrown soil. It was
a terrifying uproar of interior cataclysms, a remnant of the ancient
battle when deluges overthrew the earth, burying the mountains beneath
the plains.

And Catherine, shaken and dazed by this continuous downfall, joined her
hands, stammering the same words without cessation:

"I don't want to die! I don't want to die!"

To reassure her, tienne declared that the water was not now moving.
Their flight had lasted for fully six hours, and they would soon be
rescued. He said six hours without knowing, for they had lost all count
of time. In reality, a whole day had already passed in their climb up
through the Guillaume seam.

Drenched and shivering, they settled themselves down. She undressed
herself without shame and wrung out her clothes, then she put on
again the jacket and breeches, and let them finish drying on her. As
her feet were bare, he made her take his own sabots. They could wait
patiently now; they had lowered the wick of the lamp, leaving only the
feeble gleam of a night-light. But their stomachs were torn by cramp,
and they both realized that they were dying of hunger. Up till now
they had not felt that they were living. The catastrophe had occurred
before breakfast, and now they found their bread-and-butter swollen
by the water and changed into sop. She had to become angry before he
would accept his share. As soon as she had eaten she fell asleep from
weariness, on the cold earth. He was devoured by insomnia, and watched
over her with fixed eyes and forehead between his hands.

How many hours passed by thus? He would have been unable to say. All
that he knew was that before him, through the hole they had ascended,
he had seen the flood reappear, black and moving, the beast whose back
was ceaselessly swelling out to reach them. At first it was only a thin
line, a supple serpent stretching itself out; then it enlarged into a
crawling, crouching flank; and soon it reached them, and the sleeping
girl's feet were touched by it. In his anxiety he yet hesitated to wake
her. Was it not cruel to snatch her from this repose of unconscious
ignorance, which was, perhaps, lulling her with a dream of the open
air and of life beneath the sun? Besides, where could they fly? And he
thought and remembered that the upbrow established at this part of the
seam communicated end to end with that which served the upper level.
That would be a way out. He let her sleep as long as possible, watching
the flood gain on them, waiting for it to chase them away. At last he
lifted her gently, and a great shudder passed over her.

"Ah, my God! it's true! it's beginning again, my God!"

She remembered, she cried out, again finding death so near.

"No! calm yourself," he whispered. "We can pass, upon my word!"

To reach the upbrow they had to walk doubled up, again wetted to the
shoulders. And the climbing began anew, now more dangerous, through
this hole entirely of timber, a hundred metres long. At first they
wished to pull the cable so as to fix one of the carts at the bottom,
for if the other should come down during their ascent, they would
be crushed. But nothing moved, some obstacle interfered with the
mechanism. They ventured in, not daring to make use of the cable which
was in their way, and tearing their nails against the smooth framework.
He came behind, supporting her by his head when she slipped with torn
hands. Suddenly they came across the splinters of a beam which barred
the way. A portion of the soil had fallen down and prevented them from
going any higher. Fortunately a door opened here and they passed into a
passage. They were stupefied to see the flicker of a lamp in front of
them. A man cried wildly to them:

"More clever people as big fools as I am!"

They recognized Chaval, who had found himself blocked by the landslip
which filled the upbrow; his two mates who had set out with him had
been left on the way with fractured skulls. He was wounded in the
elbow, but had had the courage to go back on his knees, take their
lamps, and search them to steal their bread-and-butter. As he escaped,
a final downfall behind his back had closed the gallery.

He immediately swore that he would not share his victuals with these
people who came up out of the earth. He would sooner knock their brains
out. Then he, too, recognized them; his anger fell, and he began to
laugh with a laugh of evil joy.

"Ah! it's you, Catherine! you've broken your nose, and you want to join
your man again. Well, well! we'll play out the game together."

He pretended not to see tienne. The latter, overwhelmed by this
encounter, made a gesture as though to protect the putter, who was
pressing herself against him. He must, however, accept the situation.
Speaking as though they had left each other good friends an hour
before, he simply asked:

"Have you looked down below? We can't pass through the cuttings, then?"

Chaval still grinned.

"Ah, bosh! the cuttings! They've fallen in too; we are between two
walls, a real mousetrap. But you can go back by the brow if you are a
good diver."

The water, in fact, was rising; they could hear it rippling. Their
retreat was already cut off. And he was right; it was a mousetrap,
a gallery-end obstructed before and behind by considerable falls of
earth. There was not one issue; all three were walled up.

"Then you'll stay?" Chaval added, jeeringly. "Well, it's the best you
can do, and if you'll just leave me alone, I shan't even speak to you.
There's still room here for two men. We shall soon see which will die
first, provided they don't come to us, which seems a tough job."

The young man said:

"If we were to hammer, they would hear us, perhaps."

"I'm tired of hammering. Here, try yourself with this stone."

tienne picked up the fragment of sandstone which the other had already
broken off, and against the seam at the end he struck the miner's call,
the prolonged roll by which workmen in peril signal their presence.
Then he placed his ear to listen. Twenty times over he persisted; no
sound replied.

During this time Chaval affected to be coolly attending to his little
household. First he arranged the three lamps against the wall; only one
was burning, the others could be used later on. Afterwards, he placed
on a piece of timber the two slices of bread-and-butter which were
still left. That was the sideboard; he could last quite two days with
that, if he were careful. He turned round saying:

"You know, Catherine, there will be half for you when you are famished."

The young girl was silent. It completed her unhappiness to find herself
again between these two men.

And their awful life began. Neither Chaval nor tienne opened their
mouths, seated on the earth a few paces from each other. At a hint
from the former the latter extinguished his lamp, a piece of useless
luxury; then they sank back into silence. Catherine was lying down near
tienne, restless under the glances of her former lover. The hours
passed by; they heard the low murmur of the water for ever rising;
while from time to time deep shocks and distant echoes announced the
final settling down of the mine. When the lamp was empty and they had
to open another to light it, they were, for a moment, disturbed by
the fear of fire-damp; but they would rather have been blown up at
once than live on in darkness. Nothing exploded, however; there was no
fire-damp. They stretched themselves out again, and the hours continued
to pass by.

A noise aroused tienne and Catherine, and they raised their
heads. Chaval had decided to eat; he had cut off half a slice of
bread-and-butter, and was chewing it slowly, to avoid the temptation of
swallowing it all. They gazed at him, tortured by hunger.

"Well, do you refuse?" he said to the putter, in his provoking way.
"You're wrong."

She had lowered her eyes, fearing to yield; her stomach was torn by
such cramps that tears were swelling beneath her eyelids. But she
understood what he was asking; in the morning he had breathed over her
neck; he was seized again by one of his old furies of desire on seeing
her near the other man. The glances with which he called her had a
flame in them which she knew well, the flame of his crises of jealousy
when he would fall on her with his fists, accusing her of committing
abominations with her mother's lodger. And she was not willing; she
trembled lest, by returning to him, she should throw these two men
on to each other in this narrow cave, where they were all in agony
together. Good God! why could they not end together in comradeship!

tienne would have died of inanition rather than beg a mouthful of
bread from Chaval. The silence became heavy; an eternity seemed to be
prolonging itself with the slowness of monotonous minutes which passed
by, one by one, without hope. They had now been shut up together for a
day. The second lamp was growing pale, and they lighted the third.

Chaval started on his second slice of bread-and-butter, and growled:

"Come then, stupid!"

Catherine shivered. tienne had turned away in order to leave her free.
Then, as she did not stir, he said to her in a low voice:

"Go, my child."

The tears which she was stifling then rushed forth. She wept for a
long time, without even strength to rise, no longer knowing if she was
hungry, suffering with pain which she felt all over her body. He was
standing up, going backward and forwards, vainly beating the miners
call, enraged at this remainder of life which he was obliged to live
here tied to a rival whom he detested. Not even enough space to die
away from each other! As soon as he had gone ten paces he must come
back and knock up against this man. And she, this sorrowful girl whom
they were disputing over even in the earth! She would belong to the
one who lived longest; that man would steal her from him should he
go first. There was no end to it; the hours followed the hours; the
revolting promiscuity became worse, with the poison of their breaths
and the ordure of their necessities satisfied in common. Twice he
rushed against the rocks as though to open them with his fists.

Another day was done, and Chaval had seated himself near Catherine,
sharing with her his last half-slice. She was chewing the mouthfuls
painfully; he made her pay for each with a caress, in his jealous
obstinacy not willing to die until he had had her again in the other
man's presence. She abandoned herself in exhaustion. But when he tried
to take her she complained.

"Oh, leave me! you're breaking my bones."

tienne, with a shudder, had placed his forehead against the timber so
as not to see. He came back with a wild leap.

"Leave her, by God!"

"Does it concern you?" said Chaval. "She's my woman; I suppose she
belongs to me!"

And he took her again and pressed her, out of bravado, crushing his red
moustache against her mouth, and continuing:

"Will you leave us alone, eh? Will you be good enough to look over
there if we are at it?"

But tienne, with white lips, shouted:

"If you don't let her go, I'll do for you!"

The other quickly stood up, for he had understood by the hiss of the
voice that his mate was in earnest. Death seemed to them too slow; it
was necessary that one of them should immediately yield his place. It
was the old battle beginning over again, down in the earth where they
would soon sleep side by side; and they had so little room that they
could not swing their fists without grazing them.

"Look out!" growled Chaval. "This time I'll have you."

From that moment tienne became mad. His eyes seemed drowned in red
vapour, his chest was congested by the flow of blood. The need to kill
seized him irresistibly, a physical need, like the irritation of mucus
which causes a violent spasm of coughing. It rose and broke out beyond
his will, beneath the pressure of the hereditary disease. He had seized
a sheet of slate in the wall and he shook it and tore it out, a very
large, heavy piece. Then with both hands and with tenfold strength he
brought it down on Chaval's skull.

The latter had not time to jump backwards. He fell, his face crushed,
his skull broken. The brains had bespattered the roof of the gallery,
and a purple jet flowed from the wound, like the continuous jet of a
spring. Immediately there was a pool, which reflected the smoky star
of the lamp. Darkness was invading the walled-up cave, and this body,
lying on the earth, looked like the black boss of a mass of rough coal.

Leaning over, with wide eyes, tienne looked at him. It was done, then;
he had killed. All his struggles came back to his memory confusedly,
that useless fight against the poison which slept in his muscles,
the slowly accumulated alcohol of his race. He was, however, only
intoxicated by hunger; the remote intoxication of his parents had been
enough. His hair stood up before the horror of this murder; and yet, in
spite of the revolt which came from his education, a certain gladness
made his heart beat, the animal joy of an appetite at length satisfied.
He felt pride, too, the pride of the stronger man. The little soldier
appeared before him, with his throat opened by a knife, killed by a
child. Now he, too, had killed.

But Catherine, standing erect, uttered a loud cry:

"My God! he is dead!"

"Are you sorry?" asked tienne, fiercely.

She was choking, she stammered. Then, tottering, she threw herself into
his arms.

"Ah, kill me too! Ah, let us both die!"

She clasped him, hanging to his shoulders, and he clasped her; and they
hoped that they would die. But death was in no hurry, and they unlocked
their arms. Then, while she hid her eyes, he dragged away the wretch,
and threw him down the upbrow, to remove him from the narrow space in
which they still had to live. Life would no longer have been possible
with that corpse beneath their feet. And they were terrified when they
heard it plunge into the midst of the foam which leapt up. The water
had already filled that hole, then? They saw it; it was entering the
gallery.

Then there was a new struggle. They had lighted the last lamp; it
was becoming exhausted in illuminating this flood, with its regular,
obstinate rise which never ceased. At first the water came up to their
ankles; then it wetted their knees. The passage sloped up, and they
took refuge at the end. This gave them a respite for some hours. But
the flood caught them up, and bathed them to the waist. Standing up,
brought to bay, with their spines close against the rock, they watched
it ever and ever increasing. When it reached their mouths, all would
be over. The lamp, which they had fastened up, threw a yellow light
on the rapid surge of the little waves. It was becoming pale; they
could distinguish no more than a constantly diminishing semicircle, as
though eaten away by the darkness which seemed to grow with the flood;
and suddenly the darkness enveloped them. The lamp had gone out, after
having spat forth its last drop of oil. There was now complete and
absolute night, that night of the earth which they would have to sleep
through without ever again opening their eyes to the brightness of the
sun.

"By God!" tienne swore, in a low voice.

Catherine, as though she had felt the darkness seize her, sheltered
herself against him. She repeated, in a whisper, the miner's saying:

"Death is blowing out the lamp."

Yet in the face of this threat their instincts struggled, the fever
for life animated them. He violently set himself to hollow out the
slate with the hook of the lamp, while she helped him with her nails.
They formed a sort of elevated bench, and when they had both hoisted
themselves up to it, they found themselves seated with hanging legs and
bent backs, for the vault forced them to lower their heads. They now
only felt the icy water at their heels; but before long the cold was at
their ankles, their calves, their knees, with its invincible, truceless
movement. The bench, not properly smoothed, was soaked in moisture, and
so slippery that they had to hold themselves on vigorously to avoid
slipping off. It was the end; what could they expect, reduced to this
niche where they dared not move, exhausted, starving, having neither
bread nor light? and they suffered especially from the darkness,
which would not allow them to see the coming of death. There was deep
silence; the mine, being gorged with water, no longer stirred. They had
nothing beneath them now but the sensation of that sea, swelling out
its silent tide from the depths of the galleries.

The hours succeeded one another, all equally black; but they were not
able to measure their exact duration, becoming more and more vague
in their calculation of time. Their tortures, which might have been
expected to lengthen the minutes, rapidly bore them away. They thought
that they had only been shut up for two days and a night, when in
reality the third day had already come to an end. All hope of help had
gone; no one knew they were there, no one could come down to them. And
hunger would finish them off if the inundation spared them. For one
last time it occurred to them to beat the call, but the stone was lying
beneath the water. Besides, who would hear them?

Catherine was leaning her aching head against the seam, when she sat up
with a start.

"Listen!" she said.

At first tienne thought she was speaking of the low noise of the
ever-rising water. He lied in order to quiet her.

"It's me you hear; I'm moving my legs."

"No, no; not that! Over there, listen!"

And she placed her ear to the coal. He understood, and did likewise.
They waited for some seconds, with stifled breath. Then, very far away
and very weak, they heard three blows at long intervals. But they still
doubted; their ears were ringing; perhaps it was the cracking of the
soil. And they knew not what to strike with in answer.

tienne had an idea.

"You have the sabots. Take them off and strike with the heels."

She struck, beating the miner's call; and they listened and again
distinguished the three blows far off. Twenty times over they did it,
and twenty times the blows replied. They wept and embraced each other,
at the risk of losing their balance. At last the mates were there, they
were coming. An overflowing joy and love carried away the torments
of expectation and the rage of their vain appeals, as though their
rescuers had only to split the rock with a finger to deliver them.

"Eh!" she cried merrily; "wasn't it lucky that I leant my head?"

"Oh, you've got an ear!" he said in his turn. "Now, _I_ heard
nothing."

From that moment they relieved each other, one of them always
listening, ready to answer at the least signal. They soon caught the
sounds of the pick; the work of approaching them was beginning, a
gallery was being opened. Not a sound escaped them. But their joy sank.
In vain they laughed to deceive each other; despair was gradually
seizing them. At first they entered into long explanations; evidently
they were being approached from Rquillart. The gallery descended in
the bed; perhaps several were being opened, for there were always
three men hewing. Then they talked less, and were at last silent when
they came to calculate the enormous mass which separated them from
their mates. They continued their reflections in silence, counting the
days and days that a workman would take to penetrate such a block.
They would never be reached soon enough; they would have time to die
twenty times over. And no longer venturing to exchange a word in this
redoubled anguish, they gloomily replied to the appeals by a roll of
the sabots, without hope, only retaining the mechanical need to tell
the others that they were still alive.

Thus passed a day, two days. They had been at the bottom six days. The
water had stopped at their knees, neither rising nor falling, and their
legs seemed to be melting away in this icy bath. They could certainly
keep them out for an hour or so, but their position then became so
uncomfortable that they were twisted by horrible cramps, and were
obliged to let their feet fall in again. Every ten minutes they hoisted
themselves back by a jerk on the slippery rock. The fractures of the
coal struck into their spines, and they felt at the back of their
necks a fixed intense pain, through having to keep constantly bent in
order to avoid striking their heads. And their suffocation increased;
the air, driven back by the water, was compressed into a sort of bell
in which they were shut up. Their voices were muffled, and seemed to
come from afar. Their ears began to buzz, they heard the peals of a
furious tocsin, the tramp of a flock beneath a storm of hail, going on
unceasingly.

At first Catherine suffered horribly from hunger. She pressed her
poor shrivelled hands against her breasts, her breathing was deep and
hollow, a continuous tearing moan, as though tongs were tearing her
stomach.

tienne, choked by the same torture, was feeling feverishly round him
in the darkness, when his fingers came upon a half-rotten piece of
timber, which his nails could crumble. He gave a handful of it to the
putter, who swallowed it greedily. For two days they lived on this
worm-eaten wood, devouring it all, in despair when it was finished,
grazing their hands in the effort to crush the other planks which were
still solid with resisting fibres. Their torture increased, and they
were enraged that they could not chew the cloth of their clothes. A
leather belt, which he wore round the waist, relieved them a little.
He bit small pieces from it with his teeth, and she chewed them, and
endeavoured to swallow them. This occupied their jaws, and gave them
the illusion of eating. Then, when the belt was finished, they went
back to their clothes, sucking them for hours.

But soon these violent crises subsided; hunger became only a low deep
ache with the slow progressive languor of their strength. No doubt they
would have succumbed if they had not had as much water as they desired.
They merely bent down and drank from the hollow of the hand, and that
very frequently, parched by a thirst which all this water could not
quench.

On the seventh day Catherine was bending down to drink, when her hand
struck some floating body before her.

"I say, look! What's this?"

tienne felt in the darkness.

"I can't make out; it seems like the cover of a ventilation door."

She drank, but as she was drawing up a second mouthful the body came
back, striking her hand. And she uttered a terrible cry.

"My God! it's he!"

"Whom do you mean?"

"Him! You know well enough. I felt his moustache."

It was Chaval's corpse, risen from the upbrow and pushed on to them by
the flow. tienne stretched out his arm; he, too, felt the moustache
and the crushed nose, and shuddered with disgust and fear. Seized by
horrible nausea, Catherine had spat out the water which was still in
her mouth. It seemed to her that she had been drinking blood, and that
all the deep water before her was now that man's blood.

"Wait!" stammered tienne. "I'll push him off!"

He kicked the corpse, which moved off. But soon they felt it again
striking against their legs.

"By God! Get off!"

And the third time tienne had to leave it. Some current always brought
it back. Chaval would not go; he desired to be with them, against them.
It was an awful companion, at last poisoning the air. All that day they
never drank, struggling, preferring to die. It was not until the next
day that their suffering decided them: they pushed away the body at
each mouthful and drank in spite of it. It had not been worth while to
knock his brains out, for he came back between him and her, obstinate
in his jealousy. To the very end he would be there, even though he was
dead, preventing them from coming together.

A day passed, and again another day. At every shiver of the water
tienne perceived a slight blow from the man he had killed, the simple
elbowing of a neighbour who is reminding you of his presence. And
every time it came he shuddered. He continually saw it there, swollen,
greenish, with the red moustache and the crushed face. Then he no
longer remembered; he had not killed him; the other man was swimming
and trying to bite him.

Catherine was now shaken by long endless fits of crying, after which
she was completely prostrated. She fell at last into a condition of
irresistible drowsiness. He would arouse her, but she stammered a few
words and at once fell asleep again without even raising her eyelids;
and fearing lest she should be drowned, he put his arm round her waist.
It was he now who replied to the mates. The blows of the pick were now
approaching, he could hear them behind his back. But his strength, too,
was diminishing; he had lost all courage to strike. They were known to
be there; why weary oneself more? It no longer interested him whether
they came or not. In the stupefaction of waiting he would forget for
hours at a time what he was waiting for.

One relief comforted them a little: the water sank, and Chaval's
body moved off. For nine days the work of their deliverance had been
going on, and they were for the first time taking a few steps in the
gallery when a fearful commotion threw them to the ground. They felt
for each other and remained in each other's arms like mad people, not
understanding, thinking the catastrophe was beginning over again.
Nothing more stirred, the sound of the picks had ceased.

In the corner where they were seated holding each other, side by side,
a low laugh came from Catherine.

"It must be good outside. Come, let's go out of here."

tienne at first struggled against this madness. But the contagion was
shaking his stronger head, and he lost the exact sensation of reality.
All their senses seemed to go astray, especially Catherine's. She
was shaken by fever, tormented now by the need to talk and move. The
ringing in her ears had become the murmur of flowing water, the song
of birds; she smelled the strong odour of crushed grass, and could see
clearly great yellow patches floating before her eyes, so large that
she thought she was out of doors, near the canal, in the meadows on a
fine summer day.

"Eh? how warm it is! Take me, then; let us keep together. Oh, always,
always!"

He pressed her, and she rubbed herself against him for a long time,
continuing to chatter like a happy girl:

"How silly we have been to wait so long! I would have liked you at
once, and you did not understand; you sulked. Then, do you remember,
at our house at night, when we could not sleep, with our faces out
listening to each other's breathing, with such a longing to come
together?"

He was won by her gaiety, and joked over the recollection of their
silent tenderness.

"You struck me once. Yes, yes, blows on both cheeks!"

"It was because I loved you," she murmured. "You see, I prevented
myself from thinking of you. I said to myself that it was quite done
with, and all the time I knew that one day or another we should get
together. It only wanted an opportunity--some lucky chance. Wasn't it
so?"

A shudder froze him. He tried to shake off this dream; then he repeated
slowly:

"Nothing is ever done with; a little happiness is enough to make
everything begin again."

"Then you'll keep me, and it will be all right this time?"

And she slipped down fainting. She was so weak that her low voice died
out. In terror he kept her against his heart.

"Are you in pain?"

She sat up surprised.

"No, not at all. Why?"

But this question aroused her from her dream. She gazed at the darkness
with distraction, wringing her hands in another fit of sobbing.

"My God, my God, how black it is!"

It was no longer the meadows, the odour of the grass, the song of
larks, the great yellow sun; it was the fallen, inundated mine, the
stinking gloom, the melancholy dripping of this cellar where they had
been groaning for so many days. Her perverted senses now increased the
horror of it; her childish superstitions came back to her; she saw the
Black Man, the old dead miner who returns to the pit to twist naughty
girls' necks.

"Listen! did you hear?"

"No, nothing; I heard nothing."

"Yes, the Man--you know? Look! he is there. The earth has let all the
blood out of the vein to revenge itself for being cut into; and he is
there--you can see him--look! blacker than night. Oh, I'm so afraid,
I'm so afraid!"

She became silent, shivering. Then in a very low voice she whispered:

"No, it's always the other one."

"What other one?"

"Him who is with us; who is not alive."

The image of Chaval haunted her, she talked of him confusedly, she
described the dog's life she led with him, the only day when he had
been kind to her at Jean-Bart, the other days of follies and blows,
when he would kill her with caresses after having covered her with
kicks.

"I tell you that he's coming, that he will still keep us from being
together! His jealousy is coming on him again. Oh, push him off! Oh,
keep me close!"

With a sudden impulse she hung on to him, seeking his mouth and
pressing her own passionately to it. The darkness lighted up, she saw
the sun again, and she laughed a quiet laugh of love. He shuddered to
feel her thus against his flesh, half naked beneath the tattered jacket
and trousers, and he seized her with a reawakening of his virility. It
was at length their wedding night, at the bottom of this tomb, on this
bed of mud, the longing not to die before they had had their happiness,
the obstinate longing to live and make life one last time. They loved
each other in despair of everything, in death.

After that there was nothing more. tienne was seated on the ground,
always in the same corner, and Catherine was lying motionless on his
knees. Hours and hours passed by. For a long time he thought she was
sleeping; then he touched her; she was very cold, she was dead. He did
not move, however, for fear of arousing her. The idea that he was the
first who had possessed her as a woman, and that she might be pregnant,
filled him with tenderness. Other ideas, the desire to go away with
her, joy at what they would both do later on, came to him at moments,
but so vaguely that it seemed only as though his forehead had been
touched by a breath of sleep. He grew weaker, he only had strength to
make a little gesture, a slow movement of the hand, to assure himself
that she was certainly there, like a sleeping child in her frozen
stiffness. Everything was being annihilated; the night itself had
disappeared, and he was nowhere, out of space, out of time. Something
was certainly striking beside his head, violent blows were approaching
him; but he had been too lazy to reply, benumbed by immense fatigue;
and now he knew nothing, he only dreamed that she was walking before
him, and that he heard the slight clank of her sabots. Two days passed;
she had not stirred; he touched her with his mechanical gesture,
reassured to find her so quiet.

tienne felt a shock. Voices were sounding, rocks were rolling to his
feet. When he perceived a lamp he wept. His blinking eyes followed the
light, he was never tired of looking at it, enraptured by this reddish
point which scarcely stained the darkness. But some mates carried him
away, and he allowed them to introduce some spoonfuls of soup between
his clenched teeth. It was only in the Rquillart gallery that he
recognized someone standing before him, the engineer, Ngrel; and these
two men, with their contempt for each other--the rebellious workman and
the sceptical master--threw themselves on each other's necks, sobbing
loudly in the deep upheaval of all the humanity within them. It was an
immense sadness, the misery of generations, the extremity of grief into
which life can fall.

At the surface, Maheude, stricken down near dead Catherine, uttered
a cry, then another, then another--very long, deep, incessant moans.
Several corpses had already been brought up, and placed in a row on
the ground: Chaval, who was thought to have been crushed beneath a
landslip, a trammer, and two hewers, also crushed, with brainless
skulls and bellies swollen with water. Women in the crowd went out of
their minds, tearing their skirts and scratching their faces. When
tienne was at last taken out, after having been accustomed to the
lamps and fed a little, he appeared fleshless, and his hair was quite
white. People turned away and shuddered at this old man. Maheude left
off crying to stare at him stupidly with her large fixed eyes.




CHAPTER VI


It was four o'clock in the morning, and the fresh April night was
growing warm at the approach of day. In the limpid sky the stars were
twinkling out, while the east grew purple with dawn. And a slight
shudder passed over the drowsy black country, the vague rumour which
precedes awakening.

tienne, with long strides, was following the Vandame road. He had
just passed six weeks at Montsou, in bed at the hospital. Though very
thin and yellow, he felt strength to go, and he went. The Company,
still trembling for its pits, was constantly sending men away, and had
given him notice that he could not be kept on. He was offered the sum
of one hundred francs, with the paternal advice to leave off working
in mines, as it would now be too severe for him. But he refused the
hundred francs. He had already received a letter from Pluchart, calling
him to Paris, and enclosing money for the journey. His old dream would
be realized. The night before, on leaving the hospital, he had slept at
the Bon-Joyeux, Widow Dsir's. And he rose early; only one desire was
left, to bid his mates farewell before taking the eight o'clock train
at Marchiennes.

For a moment tienne stopped on the road, which was now becoming
rose-coloured. It was good to breathe that pure air of the precocious
spring. It would turn out a superb day. The sun was slowly rising, and
the life of the earth was rising with it. And he set out walking again,
vigorously striking with his brier stick, watching the plain afar, as
it rose from the vapours of the night. He had seen no one; Maheude had
come once to the hospital, and, probably, had not been able to come
again. But he knew that the whole settlement of the Deux-Cent-Quarante
was now going down at Jean-Bart, and that she too had taken work there.

Little by little the deserted roads were peopled, and colliers
constantly passed tienne with pallid, silent faces. The Company,
people said, was abusing its victory. After two and a half months
of strike, when they had returned to the pits, conquered by hunger,
they had been obliged to accept the timbering tariff, that disguised
decrease in wages, now the more hateful because stained with the
blood of their mates. They were being robbed of an hour's work, they
were being made false to their oath never to submit; and this imposed
perjury stuck in their throats like gall. Work was beginning again
everywhere, at Mirou, at Madeleine, at Crvecoeur, at the Victoire.
Everywhere, in the morning haze, along the roads lost in darkness, the
flock was tramping on, rows of men trotting with faces bent towards the
earth, like cattle led to the slaughter-house. They shivered beneath
their thin garments, folding their arms, rolling their hips, expanding
their backs with the humps formed by the brick between the shirt
and the jacket. And in this wholesale return to work, in these mute
shadows, all black, without a laugh, without a look aside, one felt
the teeth clenched with rage, the hearts swollen with hatred, a simple
resignation to the necessity of the belly.

The nearer tienne approached the pit the more their number increased.
They nearly all walked alone; those who came in groups were in single
file, already exhausted, tired of one another and of themselves. He
noticed one who was very old, with eyes that shone like hot coals
beneath his livid forehead. Another, a young man, was panting with the
restrained fury of a storm. Many had their sabots in their hands; one
could scarcely hear the soft sound of their coarse woollen stockings on
the ground. It was an endless rustling, a general downfall, the forced
march of a beaten army, moving on with lowered heads, sullenly absorbed
in the desire to renew the struggle and achieve revenge.

When tienne arrived, Jean-Bart was emerging from the shade; the
lanterns, hooked on to the platform, were still burning in the
growing dawn. Above the obscure buildings a trail of steam arose
like a white plume delicately tinted with carmine. He passed up
the sifting-staircase to go to the receiving-room. The descent was
beginning, and the men were coming from the shed. For a moment he stood
by, motionless amid the noise and movement. The rolling of the trams
shook the metal floor, the drums were turning, unrolling the cables in
the midst of cries from the trumpet, the ringing of bells, blows of
the mallet on the signal block; he found the monster again swallowing
his daily ration of human flesh, the cages rising and plunging,
engulfing their burden of men, without ceasing, with the facile gulp of
a voracious giant. Since his accident he had a nervous horror of the
mine. The cages, as they sank down, tore his bowels. He had to turn
away his head; the pit exasperated him.

But in the vast and still sombre hall, feebly lighted up by the
exhausted lanterns, he could perceive no friendly face. The miners,
who were waiting there with bare feet and their lamps in their hands,
looked at him with large restless eyes, and then lowered their faces,
drawing back with an air of shame. No doubt they knew him and no longer
had any spite against him; they seemed, on the contrary, to fear him,
blushing at the thought that he would reproach them with cowardice.
This attitude made his heart swell; he forgot that these wretches had
stoned him, he again began to dream of changing them into heroes, of
directing a whole people, this force of nature which was devouring
itself. A cage was embarking its men, and the batch disappeared; as
others arrived he saw at last one of his lieutenants in the strike, a
worthy fellow who had sworn to die.

"You too!" he murmured, with aching heart.

The other turned pale and his lips trembled; then, with a movement of
excuse:

"What would you have? I've got a wife."

Now in the new crowd coming from the shed he recognized them all.

"You too!--you too!--you too!"

And all shrank back, stammering in choked voices:

"I have a mother."--"I have children."--"One must get bread."

The cage did not reappear; they waited for it mournfully, with such
sorrow at their defeat that they avoided meeting each other's eyes,
obstinately gazing at the shaft.

"And Maheude?" tienne asked.

They made no reply. One made a sign that she was coming. Others raised
their arms, trembling with pity. Ah, poor woman! what wretchedness!
The silence continued, and when tienne stretched out his hand to bid
them farewell, they all pressed it vigorously, putting into that mute
squeeze their rage at having yielded, their feverish hope of revenge.
The cage was there; they got into it and sank, devoured by the gulf.

Pierron had appeared with his naked captain's lamp fixed into the
leather of his cap. For the past week he had been chief of the gang
at the pit-eye, and the men moved away, for promotion had rendered
him bossy. The sight of tienne annoyed him; he came up, however, and
was at last reassured when the young man announced his departure.
They talked. His wife now kept the Estaminet du Progrs, thanks to
the support of all those gentlemen, who had been so good to her. But
he interrupted himself and turned furiously on to Father Mouque,
whom he accused of not sending up the dung-heap from his stable at
the regulation hour. The old man listened with bent shoulders. Then,
before going down, suffering from this reprimand, he, too, gave his
hand to tienne, with the same long pressure as the others, warm with
restrained anger and quivering with future rebellion. And this old hand
which trembled in his, this old man who was forgiving him for the loss
of his dead children, affected tienne to such a degree that he watched
him disappear without saying a word.

"Then Maheude is not coming this morning?" he asked Pierron after a
time.

At first the latter pretended not to understand, for there was ill luck
even in speaking of her. Then, as he moved away, under the pretext of
giving an order, he said at last:

"Eh! Maheude? There she is."

In fact, Maheude had reached the shed with her lamp in her hand,
dressed in trousers and jacket, with her head confined in the cap. It
was by a charitable exception that the Company, pitying the fate of
this unhappy woman, so cruelly afflicted, had allowed her to go down
again at the age of forty; and as it seemed difficult to set her again
at haulage work, she was employed to manipulate a small ventilator
which had been installed in the north gallery, in those infernal
regions beneath Tartaret, where there was no movement of air. For
ten hours, with aching back, she turned her wheel at the bottom of a
burning tube, baked by forty degrees of heat. She earned thirty sous.

When tienne saw her, a pitiful sight in her male garments--her breast
and belly seeming to be swollen by the dampness of the cuttings--he
stammered with surprise, trying to find words to explain that he was
going away and that he wished to say good-bye to her.

She looked at him without listening, and said at last, speaking
familiarly:

"Eh? it surprises you to see me. It's true enough that I threatened to
wring the neck of the first of my children who went down again; and now
that I'm going down I ought to wring my own, ought I not? Ah, well! I
should have done it by now if it hadn't been for the old man and the
little ones at the house."

And she went on in her low, fatigued voice. She did not excuse herself,
she simply narrated things--that they had been nearly starved, and that
she had made up her mind to it, so that they might not be sent away
from the settlement.

"How is the old man?" asked tienne.

"He is always very gentle and very clean. But he is quite off his nut.
He was not brought up for that affair, you know. There was talk of
shutting him up with the madmen, but I was not willing; they would have
done for him in his soup. His story has, all the same, been very bad
for us, for he'll never get his pension; one of those gentlemen told me
that it would be immoral to give him one."

"Is Jeanlin working?"

"Yes, those gentlemen found something for him to do at the top. He gets
twenty sous. Oh! I don't complain; the bosses have been very good, as
they told me themselves. The brat's twenty sous and my thirty, that
makes fifty. If there were not six of us we should get enough to eat.
Estelle devours now, and the worst is that it will be four or five
years before Lnore and Henri are old enough to come to the pit."

tienne could not restrain a movement of pain.

"They, too!"

Maheude's pale cheeks turned red, and her eyes flamed. But her
shoulders sank as if beneath the weight of destiny.

"What would you have? They after the others. They have all been done
for there; now it's their turn."

She was silent; some landers, who were rolling trams, disturbed them.
Through the large dusty windows the early sun was entering, drowning
the lanterns in grey light; and the engine moved every three minutes,
the cables unrolled, the cages continued to swallow down men.

"Come along, you loungers, look sharp!" shouted Pierron. "Get in; we
shall never have done with it today."

Maheude, whom he was looking at, did not stir. She had already allowed
three cages to pass, and she said, as though arousing herself and
remembering tienne's first words:

"Then you're going away?"

"Yes, this morning."

"You're right; better be somewhere else if one can. And I'm glad to
have seen you, because you can know now, anyhow, that I've nothing on
my mind against you. For a moment I could have killed you, after all
that slaughter. But one thinks, doesn't one? One sees that when all's
reckoned up it's nobody's fault. No, no! it's not your fault; it's the
fault of everybody."

Now she talked with tranquillity of her dead, of her man, of Zacharie,
of Catherine; and tears only came into her eyes when she uttered
Alzire's name. She had resumed her calm reasonableness, and judged
things sensibly. It would bring no luck to the middle class to have
killed so many poor people. Sure enough, they would be punished for it
one day, for everything has to be paid for. There would even be no need
to interfere; the whole thing would explode by itself. The soldiers
would fire on the masters just as they had fired on the men. And in her
everlasting resignation, in that hereditary discipline under which she
was again bowing, a conviction had established itself, the certainty
that injustice could not last longer, and that, if there were no good
God left, another would spring up to avenge the wretched.

She spoke in a low voice, with suspicious glances round. Then, as
Pierron was coming up, she added, aloud:

"Well, if you're going, you must take your things from our house. There
are still two shirts, three handkerchiefs, and an old pair of trousers."

tienne, with a gesture, refused these few things saved from the
dealers.

"No, it's not worth while; they can be for the children. At Paris I can
arrange for myself."

Two more cages had gone down, and Pierron decided to speak straight to
Maheude.

"I say now, over there, they are waiting for you! Is that little chat
nearly done?"

But she turned her back. Why should he be so zealous, this man who
had sold himself? The descent didn't concern him. His men hated him
enough already on his level. And she persisted, with her lamp in her
hand, frozen amid the draughts in spite of the mildness of the season.
Neither tienne nor she found anything more to say. They remained
facing each other with hearts so full that they would have liked to
speak once more.

At last she spoke for the sake of speaking.

"The Levaque is in the family way. Levaque is still in prison;
Bouteloup is taking his place meanwhile."

"Ah, yes! Bouteloup."

"And, listen! did I tell you? Philomne has gone away."

"What! gone away?"

"Yes, gone away with a Pas-de-Calais miner. I was afraid she would
leave the two brats on me. But no, she took them with her. Eh? A woman
who spits blood and always looks as if she were on the point of death!"

She mused for a moment, and then went on in a slow voice:

"There's been talk on my account. You remember they said I slept with
you. Lord! After my man's death that might very well have happened if
I had been younger. But now I'm glad it wasn't so, for we should have
regretted it, sure enough."

"Yes, we should have regretted it," tienne repeated, simply.

That was all; they spoke no more. A cage was waiting for her; she was
being called angrily, threatened with a fine. Then she made up her
mind, and pressed his hand. Deeply moved, he still looked at her, so
worn and worked out, with her livid face, her discoloured hair escaping
from the blue cap, her body as of a good over-fruitful beast, deformed
beneath the jacket and trousers. And in this last pressure of the
hands he felt again the long, silent pressure of his mates, giving him
a rendezvous for the day when they would begin again. He understood
perfectly. There was a tranquil faith in the depths of her eyes. It
would be soon, and this time it would be the final blow.

"What a damned shammer!" exclaimed Pierron.

Pushed and hustled, Maheude squeezed into a tram with four others. The
signal-cord was drawn to strike for meat, the cage was unhooked and
fell into the night, and there was nothing more but the rapid flight of
the cable.

Then tienne left the pit. Below, beneath the screening-shed, he
noticed a creature seated on the earth, with legs stretched out, in the
midst of a thick pile of coal. It was Jeanlin, who was employed there
to clean the large coal. He held a block of coal between his thighs,
and freed it with a hammer from the fragments of slate. A fine powder
drowned him in such a flood of soot that the young man would never have
recognized him if the child had not lifted his ape-like face, with the
protruding ears and small greenish eyes. He laughed, with a joking air,
and, giving a final blow to the block, disappeared in the black dust
which arose.

Outside, tienne followed the road for a while, absorbed in his
thoughts. All sorts of ideas were buzzing in his head. But he felt the
open air, the free sky, and he breathed deeply. The sun was appearing
in glory at the horizon, there was a reawakening of gladness over the
whole country. A flood of gold rolled from the east to the west on
the immense plain. This heat of life was expanding and extending in a
tremor of youth, in which vibrated the sighs of the earth, the song of
birds, all the murmuring sounds of the waters and the woods. It was
good to live, and the old world wanted to live through one more spring.

And penetrated by that hope, tienne slackened his walk, his eyes
wandering to right and to left amid the gaiety of the new season. He
thought about himself, he felt himself strong, seasoned by his hard
experiences at the bottom of the mine. His education was complete, he
was going away armed, a rational soldier of the revolution, having
declared war against society as he saw it and as he condemned it. The
joy of rejoining Pluchart and of being, like Pluchart, a leader who was
listened to, inspired him with speeches, and he began to arrange the
phrases. He was meditating an enlarged programme; that middle-class
refinement, which had raised him above his class, had deepened his
hatred of the middle class. He felt the need of glorifying these
workers, whose odour of wretchedness was now unpleasant to him; he
would show that they alone were great and stainless, the only nobility
and the only strength in which humanity could be dipped afresh. He
already saw himself in the tribune, triumphing with the people, if the
people did not devour him.

The loud song of a lark made him look up towards the sky. Little red
clouds, the last vapours of the night, were melting in the limpid
blue; and the vague faces of Souvarine and Rasseneur came to his
memory. Decidedly, all was spoilt when each man tried to get power
for himself. Thus that famous International which was to have renewed
the world had impotently miscarried, and its formidable army had been
cut up and crumbled away from internal dissensions. Was Darwin right,
then, and the world only a battlefield, where the strong ate the weak
for the sake of the beauty and continuance of the race? This question
troubled him, although he settled it like a man who is satisfied
with his knowledge. But one idea dissipated his doubts and enchanted
him--that of taking up his old explanation of the theory the first time
that he should speak. If any class must be devoured, would not the
people, still new and full of life, devour the middle class, exhausted
by enjoyment? The new society would arise from new blood. And in this
expectation of an invasion of barbarians, regenerating the old decayed
nations, reappeared his absolute faith in an approaching revolution,
the real one--that of the workers--the fire of which would inflame this
century's end with that purple of the rising sun which he saw like
blood on the sky.

He still walked, dreaming, striking his brier stick against the flints
on the road, and when he glanced around him he recognized the various
places. Just there, at the Fourche-aux-Boeufs, he remembered that he
had taken command of the band that morning when the pits were sacked.
Today the brutish, deathly, ill-paid work was beginning over again.
Beneath the earth, down there at seven hundred metres, it seemed to him
he heard low, regular, continuous blows; it was the men he had just
seen go down, the black workers, who were hammering in their silent
rage. No doubt they were beaten. They had left their dead and their
money on the field; but Paris would not forget the volleys fired at
the Voreux, and the blood of the empire, too, would flow from that
incurable wound. And if the industrial crisis was drawing to an end,
if the workshops were opening again one by one, a state of war was
no less declared, and peace was henceforth impossible. The colliers
had reckoned up their men; they had tried their strength, with their
cry for justice arousing the workers all over France. Their defeat,
therefore, reassured no one. The Montsou bourgeois, in their victory,
felt the vague uneasiness that arises on the morrow of a strike,
looking behind them to see if their end did not lie inevitably over
there, in spite of all beyond that great silence. They understood that
the revolution would be born again unceasingly, perhaps to-morrow,
with a general strike--the common understanding of all workers having
general funds, and so able to hold out for months, eating their own
bread. This time a push only had been given to a ruinous society, but
they had heard the rumbling beneath their feet, and they felt more
shocks arising, and still more, until the old edifice would be crushed,
fallen in and swallowed, going down like the Voreux to the abyss.

tienne took the Joiselle road, to the left. He remembered that he had
prevented the band from rushing on to Gaston-Marie. Afar, in the clear
sky he saw the steeples of several pits--Mirou to the right, Madeleine
and Crvecoeur side by side. Work was going on everywhere; he seemed
to be able to catch the blows of the pick at the bottom of the earth,
striking now from one end of the plain to the other, one blow, and
another blow, and yet more blows, beneath the fields and roads and
villages which were laughing in the light, all the obscure labour of
the underground prison, so crushed by the enormous mass of the rocks
that one had to know it was underneath there to distinguish its great
painful sigh. And he now thought that, perhaps, violence would not
hasten things. Cutting cables, tearing up rails, breaking lamps, what a
useless task it was! It was not worth while for three thousand men to
rush about in a devastating band doing that. He vaguely divined that
lawful methods might one day be more terrible. His reason was ripening,
he had sown the wild oats of his spite. Yes, Maheude had well said,
with her good sense, that that would be the great blow--to organize
quietly, to know one another, to unite in associations when the laws
would permit it; then, on the morning when they felt their strength,
and millions of workers would be face to face with a few thousand
idlers, to take the power into their own hands and become the masters.
Ah! what a reawakening of truth and justice! The sated and crouching
god would at once get his death-blow, the monstrous idol hidden in the
depths of his sanctuary, in that unknown distance where poor wretches
fed him with their flesh without ever having seen him.

But tienne, leaving the Vandame road, now came on to the paved street.
On the right he saw Montsou, which was lost in the valley. Opposite
were the ruins of the Voreux, the accursed hole where three pumps
worked unceasingly. Then there were the other pits at the horizon, the
Victoire, Saint-Thomas, Feutry-Cantel; while, towards the north, the
tall chimneys of the blast furnaces, and the batteries of coke ovens,
were smoking in the transparent morning air. If he was not to lose the
eight o'clock train he must hasten, for he had still six kilometres
before him.

And beneath his feet, the deep blows, those obstinate blows of the
pick, continued. The mates were all there; he heard them following him
at every stride. Was not that Maheude beneath the beetroots, with bent
back and hoarse respiration accompanying the rumble of the ventilator?
To left, to right, farther on, he seemed to recognize others beneath
the wheatfields, the hedges, the young trees. Now the April sun, in the
open sky, was shining in his glory, and warming the pregnant earth.
From its fertile flanks life was leaping out, buds were bursting into
green leaves, and the fields were quivering with the growth of the
grass. On every side seeds were swelling, stretching out, cracking the
plain, filled by the need of heat and light. An overflow of sap was
mixed with whispering voices, the sound of the germs expanding in a
great kiss. Again and again, more and more distinctly, as though they
were approaching the soil, the mates were hammering. In the fiery rays
of the sun on this youthful morning the country seemed full of that
sound. Men were springing forth, a black avenging army, germinating
slowly in the furrows, growing towards the harvests of the next
century, and their germination would soon overturn the earth.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Germinal, by mile Zola

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GERMINAL ***

***** This file should be named 56528-8.txt or 56528-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/5/2/56528/

Produced by Dagny and Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Oliver Twist, by Charles Dickens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Oliver Twist

Author: Charles Dickens

Posting Date: October 10, 2008 [EBook #730]
Release Date: November, 1996

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLIVER TWIST ***




Produced by Peggy Gaugy and Leigh Little.  HTML version by Al Haines.









OLIVER TWIST

OR

THE PARISH BOY'S PROGRESS


BY

CHARLES DICKENS




CONTENTS

       I  TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE
          CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH
      II  TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST'S GROWTH, EDUCATION, AND BOARD
     III  RELATES HOW OLIVER TWIST WAS VERY NEAR GETTING A PLACE WHICH
          WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN A SINECURE
      IV  OLIVER, BEING OFFERED ANOTHER PLACE, MAKES HIS FIRST ENTRY INTO
          PUBLIC LIFE
       V  OLIVER MINGLES WITH NEW ASSOCIATES.  GOING TO A FUNERAL FOR THE
          FIRST TIME, HE FORMS AN UNFAVOURABLE NOTION OF HIS MASTER'S
          BUSINESS
      VI  OLIVER, BEING GOADED BY THE TAUNTS OF NOAH, ROUSES INTO ACTION,
          AND RATHER ASTONISHES HIM
     VII  OLIVER CONTINUES REFRACTORY
    VIII  OLIVER WALKS TO LONDON.  HE ENCOUNTERS ON THE ROAD A STRANGE
          SORT OF YOUNG GENTLEMAN
      IX  CONTAINING FURTHER PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE PLEASANT OLD
          GENTLEMAN, AND HIS HOPEFUL PUPILS
       X  OLIVER BECOMES BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH THE CHARACTERS OF HIS NEW
          ASSOCIATES; AND PURCHASES EXPERIENCE AT A HIGH PRICE. BEING A
          SHORT, BUT VERY IMPORTANT CHAPTER, IN THIS HISTORY
      XI  TREATS OF MR. FANG THE POLICE MAGISTRATE; AND FURNISHES A
          SLIGHT SPECIMEN OF HIS MODE OF ADMINISTERING JUSTICE
     XII  IN WHICH OLIVER IS TAKEN BETTER CARE OF THAN HE EVER WAS
          BEFORE.  AND IN WHICH THE NARRATIVE REVERTS TO THE MERRY OLD
          GENTLEMAN AND HIS YOUTHFUL FRIENDS.
    XIII  SOME NEW ACQUAINTANCES ARE INTRODUCED TO THE INTELLIGENT READER,
          CONNECTED WITH WHOM VARIOUS PLEASANT MATTERS ARE RELATED,
          APPERTAINING TO THIS HISTORY
     XIV  COMPRISING FURTHER PARTICULARS OF OLIVER'S STAY AT MR.
          BROWNLOW'S, WITH THE REMARKABLE PREDICTION WHICH ONE MR. GRIMWIG
          UTTERED CONCERNING HIM, WHEN HE WENT OUT ON AN ERRAND
      XV  SHOWING HOW VERY FOND OF OLIVER TWIST, THE MERRY OLD JEW AND
          MISS NANCY WERE
     XVI  RELATES WHAT BECAME OF OLIVER TWIST, AFTER HE HAD BEEN CLAIMED
          BY NANCY
    XVII  OLIVER'S DESTINY CONTINUING UNPROPITIOUS, BRINGS A GREAT MAN TO
          LONDON TO INJURE HIS REPUTATION
   XVIII  HOW OLIVER PASSED HIS TIME IN THE IMPROVING SOCIETY OF HIS
          REPUTABLE FRIENDS
     XIX  IN WHICH A NOTABLE PLAN IS DISCUSSED AND DETERMINED ON
      XX  WHEREIN OLIVER IS DELIVERED OVER TO MR. WILLIAM SIKES
     XXI  THE EXPEDITION
    XXII  THE BURGLARY
   XXIII  WHICH CONTAINS THE SUBSTANCE OF A PLEASANT CONVERSATION BETWEEN
          MR. BUMBLE AND A LADY; AND SHOWS THAT EVEN A BEADLE MAY BE
          SUSCEPTIBLE ON SOME POINTS
    XXIV  TREATS ON A VERY POOR SUBJECT.  BUT IS A SHORT ONE, AND MAY BE
          FOUND OF IMPORTANCE IN THIS HISTORY
     XXV  WHEREIN THIS HISTORY REVERTS TO MR. FAGIN AND COMPANY
    XXVI  IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE; AND MANY
          THINGS, INSEPARABLE FROM THIS HISTORY, ARE DONE AND PERFORMED
   XXVII  ATONES FOR THE UNPOLITENESS OF A FORMER CHAPTER; WHICH DESERTED
          A LADY, MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY
  XXVIII  LOOKS AFTER OLIVER, AND PROCEEDS WITH HIS ADVENTURES
    XXIX  HAS AN INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNT OF THE INMATES OF THE HOUSE, TO
          WHICH OLIVER RESORTED
     XXX  RELATES WHAT OLIVER'S NEW VISITORS THOUGHT OF HIM
    XXXI  INVOLVES A CRITICAL POSITION
   XXXII  OF THE HAPPY LIFE OLIVER BEGAN TO LEAD WITH HIS KIND FRIENDS
  XXXIII  WHEREIN THE HAPPINESS OF OLIVER AND HIS FRIENDS, EXPERIENCES A
          SUDDEN CHECK
   XXXIV  CONTAINS SOME INTRODUCTORY PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO A YOUNG
          GENTLEMAN WHO NOW ARRIVES UPON THE SCENE; AND A NEW ADVENTURE
          WHICH HAPPENED TO OLIVER
    XXXV  CONTAINING THE UNSATISFACTORY RESULT OF OLIVER'S ADVENTURE; AND
          A CONVERSATION OF SOME IMPORTANCE BETWEEN HARRY MAYLIE AND ROSE
   XXXVI  IS A VERY SHORT ONE, AND MAY APPEAR OF NO GREAT IMPORTANCE IN
          ITS PLACE, BUT IT SHOULD BE READ NOTWITHSTANDING, AS A SEQUEL
          TO THE LAST, AND A KEY TO ONE THAT WILL FOLLOW WHEN ITS TIME
          ARRIVES
  XXXVII  IN WHICH THE READER MAY PERCEIVE A CONTRAST, NOT UNCOMMON IN
          MATRIMONIAL CASES
 XXXVIII  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN MR. AND MRS.
          BUMBLE, AND MR. MONKS, AT THEIR NOCTURNAL INTERVIEW
   XXXIX  INTRODUCES SOME RESPECTABLE CHARACTERS WITH WHOM THE READER IS
          ALREADY ACQUAINTED, AND SHOWS HOW MONKS AND THE JEW LAID THEIR
          WORTHY HEADS TOGETHER
      XL  A STRANGE INTERVIEW, WHICH IS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST CHAMBER
     XLI  CONTAINING FRESH DISCOVERIES, AND SHOWING THAT SUPRISES, LIKE
          MISFORTUNES, SELDOM COME ALONE
    XLII  AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE OF OLIVER'S, EXHIBITING DECIDED MARKS OF
          GENIUS, BECOMES A PUBLIC CHARACTER IN THE METROPOLIS
   XLIII  WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW THE ARTFUL DODGER GOT INTO TROUBLE
    XLIV  THE TIME ARRIVES FOR NANCY TO REDEEM HER PLEDGE TO ROSE MAYLIE.
          SHE FAILS.
     XLV  NOAH CLAYPOLE IS EMPLOYED BY FAGIN ON A SECRET MISSION
    XLVI  THE APPOINTMENT KEPT
   XLVII  FATAL CONSEQUENCES
  XLVIII  THE FLIGHT OF SIKES
    XLIX  MONKS AND MR. BROWNLOW AT LENGTH MEET.  THEIR CONVERSATION,
          AND THE INTELLIGENCE THAT INTERRUPTS IT
       L  THE PURSUIT AND ESCAPE
      LI  AFFORDING AN EXPLANATION OF MORE MYSTERIES THAN ONE, AND
          COMPREHENDING A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE WITH NO WORD OF SETTLEMENT
          OR PIN-MONEY
     LII  FAGIN'S LAST NIGHT ALIVE
    LIII  AND LAST




CHAPTER I

TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH

Among other public buildings in a certain town, which for many reasons
it will be prudent to refrain from mentioning, and to which I will
assign no fictitious name, there is one anciently common to most towns,
great or small: to wit, a workhouse; and in this workhouse was born; on
a day and date which I need not trouble myself to repeat, inasmuch as
it can be of no possible consequence to the reader, in this stage of
the business at all events; the item of mortality whose name is
prefixed to the head of this chapter.

For a long time after it was ushered into this world of sorrow and
trouble, by the parish surgeon, it remained a matter of considerable
doubt whether the child would survive to bear any name at all; in which
case it is somewhat more than probable that these memoirs would never
have appeared; or, if they had, that being comprised within a couple of
pages, they would have possessed the inestimable merit of being the
most concise and faithful specimen of biography, extant in the
literature of any age or country.

Although I am not disposed to maintain that the being born in a
workhouse, is in itself the most fortunate and enviable circumstance
that can possibly befall a human being, I do mean to say that in this
particular instance, it was the best thing for Oliver Twist that could
by possibility have occurred.  The fact is, that there was considerable
difficulty in inducing Oliver to take upon himself the office of
respiration,--a troublesome practice, but one which custom has rendered
necessary to our easy existence; and for some time he lay gasping on a
little flock mattress, rather unequally poised between this world and
the next: the balance being decidedly in favour of the latter.  Now,
if, during this brief period, Oliver had been surrounded by careful
grandmothers, anxious aunts, experienced nurses, and doctors of
profound wisdom, he would most inevitably and indubitably have been
killed in no time.  There being nobody by, however, but a pauper old
woman, who was rendered rather misty by an unwonted allowance of beer;
and a parish surgeon who did such matters by contract; Oliver and
Nature fought out the point between them.  The result was, that, after
a few struggles, Oliver breathed, sneezed, and proceeded to advertise
to the inmates of the workhouse the fact of a new burden having been
imposed  upon the parish, by setting up as loud a cry as could
reasonably have been expected from a male infant who had not been
possessed of that very useful appendage, a voice, for a much longer
space of time than three minutes and a quarter.

As Oliver gave this first proof of the free and proper action of his
lungs, the patchwork coverlet which was carelessly flung over the iron
bedstead, rustled; the pale face of a young woman was raised feebly
from the pillow; and a faint voice imperfectly articulated the words,
'Let me see the child, and die.'

The surgeon had been sitting with his face turned towards the fire:
giving the palms of his hands a warm and a rub alternately.  As the
young woman spoke, he rose, and advancing to the bed's head, said, with
more kindness than might have been expected of him:

'Oh, you must not talk about dying yet.'

'Lor bless her dear heart, no!' interposed the nurse, hastily
depositing in her pocket a green glass bottle, the contents of which
she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction.

'Lor bless her dear heart, when she has lived as long as I have, sir,
and had thirteen children of her own, and all on 'em dead except two,
and them in the wurkus with me, she'll know better than to take on in
that way, bless her dear heart!  Think what it is to be a mother,
there's a dear young lamb do.'

Apparently this consolatory perspective of a mother's prospects failed
in producing its due effect.  The patient shook her head, and stretched
out her hand towards the child.

The surgeon deposited it in her arms.  She imprinted her cold white
lips passionately on its forehead; passed her hands over her face;
gazed wildly round; shuddered; fell back--and died. They chafed her
breast, hands, and temples; but the blood had stopped forever.  They
talked of hope and comfort. They had been strangers too long.

'It's all over, Mrs. Thingummy!' said the surgeon at last.

'Ah, poor dear, so it is!' said the nurse, picking up the cork of the
green bottle, which had fallen out on the pillow, as she stooped to
take up the child.  'Poor dear!'

'You needn't mind sending up to me, if the child cries, nurse,' said
the surgeon, putting on his gloves with great deliberation. 'It's very
likely it _will_ be troublesome. Give it a little gruel if it is.'  He
put on his hat, and, pausing by the bed-side on his way to the door,
added, 'She was a good-looking girl, too; where did she come from?'

'She was brought here last night,' replied the old woman, 'by the
overseer's order.  She was found lying in the street.  She had walked
some distance, for her shoes were worn to pieces; but where she came
from, or where she was going to, nobody knows.'

The surgeon leaned over the body, and raised the left hand.  'The old
story,' he said, shaking his head: 'no wedding-ring, I see. Ah!
Good-night!'

The medical gentleman walked away to dinner; and the nurse, having once
more applied herself to the green bottle, sat down on a low chair
before the fire, and proceeded to dress the infant.

What an excellent example of the power of dress, young Oliver Twist
was!  Wrapped in the blanket which had hitherto formed his only
covering, he might have been the child of a nobleman or a beggar; it
would have been hard for the haughtiest stranger to have assigned him
his proper station in society.  But now that he was enveloped in the
old calico robes which had grown yellow in the same service, he was
badged and ticketed, and fell into his place at once--a parish
child--the orphan of a workhouse--the humble, half-starved drudge--to
be cuffed and buffeted through the world--despised by all, and pitied
by none.

Oliver cried lustily. If he could have known that he was an orphan,
left to the tender mercies of church-wardens and overseers, perhaps he
would have cried the louder.



CHAPTER II

TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST'S GROWTH, EDUCATION, AND BOARD

For the next eight or ten months, Oliver was the victim of a systematic
course of treachery and deception.  He was brought up by hand.  The
hungry and destitute situation of the infant orphan was duly reported
by the workhouse authorities to the parish authorities.  The parish
authorities inquired with dignity of the workhouse authorities, whether
there was no female then domiciled in 'the house' who was in a
situation to impart to Oliver Twist, the consolation and nourishment of
which he stood in need.  The workhouse authorities replied with
humility, that there was not. Upon this, the parish authorities
magnanimously and humanely resolved, that Oliver should be 'farmed,'
or, in other words, that he should be dispatched to a branch-workhouse
some three miles off, where twenty or thirty other juvenile offenders
against the poor-laws, rolled about the floor all day, without the
inconvenience of too much food or too much clothing, under the parental
superintendence of an elderly female, who received the culprits at and
for the consideration of sevenpence-halfpenny per small head per week.
Sevenpence-halfpenny's worth per week is a good round diet for a child;
a great deal may be got for sevenpence-halfpenny, quite enough to
overload its stomach, and make it uncomfortable. The elderly female was
a woman of wisdom and experience; she knew what was good for children;
and she had a very accurate perception of what was good for herself.
So, she appropriated the greater part of the weekly stipend to her own
use, and consigned the rising parochial generation to even a shorter
allowance than was originally provided for them.  Thereby finding in
the lowest depth a deeper still; and proving herself a very great
experimental philosopher.

Everybody knows the story of another experimental philosopher who had a
great theory about a horse being able to live without eating, and who
demonstrated it so well, that he had got his own horse down to a straw
a day, and would unquestionably have rendered him a very spirited and
rampacious animal on nothing at all, if he had not died,
four-and-twenty hours before he was to have had his first comfortable
bait of air.  Unfortunately for, the experimental philosophy of the
female to whose protecting care Oliver Twist was delivered over, a
similar result usually attended the operation of _her_ system; for at
the very moment when the child had contrived to exist upon the smallest
possible portion of the weakest possible food, it did perversely happen
in eight and a half cases out of ten, either that it sickened from want
and cold, or fell into the fire from neglect, or got half-smothered by
accident; in any one of which cases, the miserable little being was
usually summoned into another world, and there gathered to the fathers
it had never known in this.

Occasionally, when there was some more than usually interesting inquest
upon a parish child who had been overlooked in turning up a bedstead,
or inadvertently scalded to death when there happened to be a
washing--though the latter accident was very scarce, anything
approaching to a washing being of rare occurrence in the farm--the jury
would take it into their heads to ask troublesome questions, or the
parishioners would rebelliously affix their signatures to a
remonstrance.  But these impertinences were speedily checked by the
evidence of the surgeon, and the testimony of the beadle; the former of
whom had always opened the body and found nothing inside (which was
very probable indeed), and the latter of whom invariably swore whatever
the parish wanted; which was very self-devotional.  Besides, the board
made periodical pilgrimages to the farm, and always sent the beadle the
day before, to say they were going.  The children were neat and clean
to behold, when _they_ went; and what more would the people have!

It cannot be expected that this system of farming would produce any
very extraordinary or luxuriant crop.  Oliver Twist's ninth birthday
found him a pale thin child, somewhat diminutive in stature, and
decidedly small in circumference.  But nature or inheritance had
implanted a good sturdy spirit in Oliver's breast.  It had had plenty
of room to expand, thanks to the spare diet of the establishment; and
perhaps to this circumstance may be attributed his having any ninth
birth-day at all.  Be this as it may, however, it was his ninth
birthday; and he was keeping it in the coal-cellar with a select party
of two other young gentleman, who, after participating with him in a
sound thrashing, had been locked up for atrociously presuming to be
hungry, when Mrs. Mann, the good lady of the house, was unexpectedly
startled by the apparition of Mr. Bumble, the beadle, striving to undo
the wicket of the garden-gate.

'Goodness gracious!  Is that you, Mr. Bumble, sir?' said Mrs. Mann,
thrusting her head out of the window in well-affected ecstasies of joy.
'(Susan, take Oliver and them two brats upstairs, and wash 'em
directly.)--My heart alive!  Mr. Bumble, how glad I am to see you,
sure-ly!'

Now, Mr. Bumble was a fat man, and a choleric; so, instead of
responding to this open-hearted salutation in a kindred spirit, he gave
the little wicket a tremendous shake, and then bestowed upon it a kick
which could have emanated from no leg but a beadle's.

'Lor, only think,' said Mrs. Mann, running out,--for the three boys had
been removed by this time,--'only think of that!  That I should have
forgotten that the gate was bolted on the inside, on account of them
dear children!  Walk in sir; walk in, pray, Mr. Bumble, do, sir.'

Although this invitation was accompanied with a curtsey that might have
softened the heart of a church-warden, it by no means mollified the
beadle.

'Do you think this respectful or proper conduct, Mrs. Mann,' inquired
Mr. Bumble, grasping his cane, 'to keep the parish officers a waiting
at your garden-gate, when they come here upon porochial business with
the porochial orphans?  Are you aweer, Mrs. Mann, that you are, as I
may say, a porochial delegate, and a stipendiary?'

'I'm sure Mr. Bumble, that I was only a telling one or two of the dear
children as is so fond of you, that it was you a coming,' replied Mrs.
Mann with great humility.

Mr. Bumble had a great idea of his oratorical powers and his
importance.  He had displayed the one, and vindicated the other. He
relaxed.

'Well, well, Mrs. Mann,' he replied in a calmer tone; 'it may be as you
say; it may be.  Lead the way in, Mrs. Mann, for I come on business,
and have something to say.'

Mrs. Mann ushered the beadle into a small parlour with a brick floor;
placed a seat for him; and officiously deposited his cocked hat and
cane on the table before him.  Mr. Bumble wiped from his forehead the
perspiration which his walk had engendered, glanced complacently at the
cocked hat, and smiled.  Yes, he smiled.  Beadles are but men: and Mr.
Bumble smiled.

'Now don't you be offended at what I'm a going to say,' observed Mrs.
Mann, with captivating sweetness.  'You've had a long walk, you know,
or I wouldn't mention it.  Now, will you take a little drop of
somethink, Mr. Bumble?'

'Not a drop.  Nor a drop,' said Mr. Bumble, waving his right hand in a
dignified, but placid manner.

'I think you will,' said Mrs. Mann, who had noticed the tone of the
refusal, and the gesture that had accompanied it.  'Just a leetle drop,
with a little cold water, and a lump of sugar.'

Mr. Bumble coughed.

'Now, just a leetle drop,' said Mrs. Mann persuasively.

'What is it?' inquired the beadle.

'Why, it's what I'm obliged to keep a little of in the house, to put
into the blessed infants' Daffy, when they ain't well, Mr. Bumble,'
replied Mrs. Mann as she opened a corner cupboard, and took down a
bottle and glass.  'It's gin.  I'll not deceive you, Mr. B.  It's gin.'

'Do you give the children Daffy, Mrs. Mann?' inquired Bumble, following
with his eyes the interesting process of mixing.

'Ah, bless 'em, that I do, dear as it is,' replied the nurse. 'I
couldn't see 'em suffer before my very eyes, you know sir.'

'No'; said Mr. Bumble approvingly; 'no, you could not.  You are a
humane woman, Mrs. Mann.'  (Here she set down the glass.)  'I shall
take a early opportunity of mentioning it to the board, Mrs. Mann.'
(He drew it towards him.)  'You feel as a mother, Mrs. Mann.'  (He
stirred the gin-and-water.) 'I--I drink your health with cheerfulness,
Mrs. Mann'; and he swallowed half of it.

'And now about business,' said the beadle, taking out a leathern
pocket-book.  'The child that was half-baptized Oliver Twist, is nine
year old to-day.'

'Bless him!' interposed Mrs. Mann, inflaming her left eye with the
corner of her apron.

'And notwithstanding a offered reward of ten pound, which was
afterwards increased to twenty pound.  Notwithstanding the most
superlative, and, I may say, supernat'ral exertions on the part of this
parish,' said Bumble, 'we have never been able to discover who is his
father, or what was his mother's settlement, name, or condition.'

Mrs. Mann raised her hands in astonishment; but added, after a moment's
reflection, 'How comes he to have any name at all, then?'

The beadle drew himself up with great pride, and said, 'I inwented it.'

'You, Mr. Bumble!'

'I, Mrs. Mann.  We name our fondlings in alphabetical order. The last
was a S,--Swubble, I named him. This was a T,--Twist, I named _him_.
The next one comes will be Unwin, and the next Vilkins.  I have got
names ready made to the end of the alphabet, and all the way through it
again, when we come to Z.'

'Why, you're quite a literary character, sir!' said Mrs. Mann.

'Well, well,' said the beadle, evidently gratified with the compliment;
'perhaps I may be.  Perhaps I may be, Mrs. Mann.' He finished the
gin-and-water, and added, 'Oliver being now too old to remain here, the
board have determined to have him back into the house.  I have come out
myself to take him there.  So let me see him at once.'

'I'll fetch him directly,' said Mrs. Mann, leaving the room for that
purpose.  Oliver, having had by this time as much of the outer coat of
dirt which encrusted his face and hands, removed, as could be scrubbed
off in one washing, was led into the room by his benevolent protectress.

'Make a bow to the gentleman, Oliver,' said Mrs. Mann.

Oliver made a bow, which was divided between the beadle on the chair,
and the cocked hat on the table.

'Will you go along with me, Oliver?' said Mr. Bumble, in a majestic
voice.

Oliver was about to say that he would go along with anybody with great
readiness, when, glancing upward, he caught sight of Mrs. Mann, who had
got behind the beadle's chair, and was shaking her fist at him with a
furious countenance.  He took the hint at once, for the fist had been
too often impressed upon his body not to be deeply impressed upon his
recollection.

'Will she go with me?' inquired poor Oliver.

'No, she can't,' replied Mr. Bumble.  'But she'll come and see you
sometimes.'

This was no very great consolation to the child.  Young as he was,
however, he had sense enough to make a feint of feeling great regret at
going away.  It was no very difficult matter for the boy to call tears
into his eyes.  Hunger and recent ill-usage are great assistants if you
want to cry; and Oliver cried very naturally indeed.  Mrs. Mann gave
him a thousand embraces, and what Oliver wanted a great deal more, a
piece of bread and butter, less he should seem too hungry when he got
to the workhouse. With the slice of bread in his hand, and the little
brown-cloth parish cap on his head, Oliver was then led away by Mr.
Bumble from the wretched home where one kind word or look had never
lighted the gloom of his infant years.  And yet he burst into an agony
of childish grief, as the cottage-gate closed after him.  Wretched as
were the little companions in misery he was leaving behind, they were
the only friends he had ever known; and a sense of his loneliness in
the great wide world, sank into the child's heart for the first time.

Mr. Bumble walked on with long strides; little Oliver, firmly grasping
his gold-laced cuff, trotted beside him, inquiring at the end of every
quarter of a mile whether they were 'nearly there.' To these
interrogations Mr. Bumble returned very brief and snappish replies; for
the temporary blandness which gin-and-water awakens in some bosoms had
by this time evaporated; and he was once again a beadle.

Oliver had not been within the walls of the workhouse a quarter of an
hour, and had scarcely completed the demolition of a second slice of
bread, when Mr. Bumble, who had handed him over to the care of an old
woman, returned; and, telling him it was a board night, informed him
that the board had said he was to appear before it forthwith.

Not having a very clearly defined notion of what a live board was,
Oliver was rather astounded by this intelligence, and was not quite
certain whether he ought to laugh or cry.  He had no time to think
about the matter, however; for Mr. Bumble gave him a tap on the head,
with his cane, to wake him up: and another on the back to make him
lively: and bidding him to follow, conducted him into a large
white-washed room, where eight or ten fat gentlemen were sitting round
a table.  At the top of the table, seated in an arm-chair rather higher
than the rest, was a particularly fat gentleman with a very round, red
face.

'Bow to the board,' said Bumble.  Oliver brushed away two or three
tears that were lingering in his eyes; and seeing no board but the
table, fortunately bowed to that.

'What's your name, boy?' said the gentleman in the high chair.

Oliver was frightened at the sight of so many gentlemen, which made him
tremble: and the beadle gave him another tap behind, which made him
cry.  These two causes made him answer in a very low and hesitating
voice; whereupon a gentleman in a white waistcoat said he was a fool.
Which was a capital way of raising his spirits, and putting him quite
at his ease.

'Boy,' said the gentleman in the high chair, 'listen to me. You know
you're an orphan, I suppose?'

'What's that, sir?' inquired poor Oliver.

'The boy _is_ a fool--I thought he was,' said the gentleman in the
white waistcoat.

'Hush!' said the gentleman who had spoken first.  'You know you've got
no father or mother, and that you were brought up by the parish, don't
you?'

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver, weeping bitterly.

'What are you crying for?' inquired the gentleman in the white
waistcoat.  And to be sure it was very extraordinary.  What _could_ the
boy be crying for?

'I hope you say your prayers every night,' said another gentleman in a
gruff voice; 'and pray for the people who feed you, and take care of
you--like a Christian.'

'Yes, sir,' stammered the boy.  The gentleman who spoke last was
unconsciously right.  It would have been very like a Christian, and a
marvellously good Christian too, if Oliver had prayed for the people
who fed and took care of _him_. But he hadn't, because nobody had
taught him.

'Well!  You have come here to be educated, and taught a useful trade,'
said the red-faced gentleman in the high chair.

'So you'll begin to pick oakum to-morrow morning at six o'clock,' added
the surly one in the white waistcoat.

For the combination of both these blessings in the one simple process
of picking oakum, Oliver bowed low by the direction of the beadle, and
was then hurried away to a large ward; where, on a rough, hard bed, he
sobbed himself to sleep.  What a novel illustration of the tender laws
of England!  They let the paupers go to sleep!

Poor Oliver!  He little thought, as he lay sleeping in happy
unconsciousness of all around him, that the board had that very day
arrived at a decision which would exercise the most material influence
over all his future fortunes.  But they had.  And this was it:

The members of this board were very sage, deep, philosophical men; and
when they came to turn their attention to the workhouse, they found out
at once, what ordinary folks would never have discovered--the poor
people liked it!  It was a regular place of public entertainment for
the poorer classes; a tavern where there was nothing to pay; a public
breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper all the year round; a brick and
mortar elysium, where it was all play and no work.  'Oho!' said the
board, looking very knowing; 'we are the fellows to set this to rights;
we'll stop it all, in no time.'  So, they established the rule, that
all poor people should have the alternative (for they would compel
nobody, not they), of being starved by a gradual process in the house,
or by a quick one out of it.  With this view, they contracted with the
water-works to lay on an unlimited supply of water; and with a
corn-factor to supply periodically small quantities of oatmeal; and
issued three meals of thin gruel a day, with an onion twice a week, and
half a roll of Sundays.  They made a great many other wise and humane
regulations, having reference to the ladies, which it is not necessary
to repeat; kindly undertook to divorce poor married people, in
consequence of the great expense of a suit in Doctors' Commons; and,
instead of compelling a man to support his family, as they had
theretofore done, took his family away from him, and made him a
bachelor!  There is no saying how many applicants for relief, under
these last two heads, might have started up in all classes of society,
if it had not been coupled with the workhouse; but the board were
long-headed men, and had provided for this difficulty.  The relief was
inseparable from the workhouse and the gruel; and that frightened
people.

For the first six months after Oliver Twist was removed, the system was
in full operation.  It was rather expensive at first, in consequence of
the increase in the undertaker's bill, and the necessity of taking in
the clothes of all the paupers, which fluttered loosely on their
wasted, shrunken forms, after a week or two's gruel.  But the number of
workhouse inmates got thin as well as the paupers; and the board were
in ecstasies.

The room in which the boys were fed, was a large stone hall, with a
copper at one end: out of which the master, dressed in an apron for the
purpose, and assisted by one or two women, ladled the gruel at
mealtimes.  Of this festive composition each boy had one porringer, and
no more--except on occasions of great public rejoicing, when he had two
ounces and a quarter of bread besides.

The bowls never wanted washing.  The boys polished them with their
spoons till they shone again; and when they had performed this
operation (which never took very long, the spoons being nearly as large
as the bowls), they would sit staring at the copper, with such eager
eyes, as if they could have devoured the very bricks of which it was
composed; employing themselves, meanwhile, in sucking their fingers
most assiduously, with the view of catching up any stray splashes of
gruel that might have been cast thereon.  Boys have generally excellent
appetites. Oliver Twist and his companions suffered the tortures of
slow starvation for three months: at last they got so voracious and
wild with hunger, that one boy, who was tall for his age, and hadn't
been used to that sort of thing (for his father had kept a small
cook-shop), hinted darkly to his companions, that unless he had another
basin of gruel per diem, he was afraid he might some night happen to
eat the boy who slept next him, who happened to be a weakly youth of
tender age.  He had a wild, hungry eye; and they implicitly believed
him. A council was held; lots were cast who should walk up to the
master after supper that evening, and ask for more; and it fell to
Oliver Twist.

The evening arrived; the boys took their places.  The master, in his
cook's uniform, stationed himself at the copper; his pauper assistants
ranged themselves behind him; the gruel was served out; and a long
grace was said over the short commons.  The gruel disappeared; the boys
whispered each other, and winked at Oliver; while his next neighbors
nudged him.  Child as he was, he was desperate with hunger, and
reckless with misery.  He rose from the table; and advancing to the
master, basin and spoon in hand, said: somewhat alarmed at his own
temerity:

'Please, sir, I want some more.'

The master was a fat, healthy man; but he turned very pale. He gazed in
stupefied astonishment on the small rebel for some seconds, and then
clung for support to the copper.  The assistants were paralysed with
wonder; the boys with fear.

'What!' said the master at length, in a faint voice.

'Please, sir,' replied Oliver, 'I want some more.'

The master aimed a blow at Oliver's head with the ladle; pinioned him
in his arm; and shrieked aloud for the beadle.

The board were sitting in solemn conclave, when Mr. Bumble rushed into
the room in great excitement, and addressing the gentleman in the high
chair, said,

'Mr. Limbkins, I beg your pardon, sir!  Oliver Twist has asked for
more!'

There was a general start.  Horror was depicted on every countenance.

'For _more_!' said Mr. Limbkins.  'Compose yourself, Bumble, and answer
me distinctly.  Do I understand that he asked for more, after he had
eaten the supper allotted by the dietary?'

'He did, sir,' replied Bumble.

'That boy will be hung,' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.  'I
know that boy will be hung.'

Nobody controverted the prophetic gentleman's opinion.  An animated
discussion took place.  Oliver was ordered into instant confinement;
and a bill was next morning pasted on the outside of the gate, offering
a reward of five pounds to anybody who would take Oliver Twist off the
hands of the parish.  In other words, five pounds and Oliver Twist were
offered to any man or woman who wanted an apprentice to any trade,
business, or calling.

'I never was more convinced of anything in my life,' said the gentleman
in the white waistcoat, as he knocked at the gate and read the bill
next morning: 'I never was more convinced of anything in my life, than
I am that that boy will come to be hung.'

As I purpose to show in the sequel whether the white waistcoated
gentleman was right or not, I should perhaps mar the interest of this
narrative (supposing it to possess any at all), if I ventured to hint
just yet, whether the life of Oliver Twist had this violent termination
or no.



CHAPTER III

RELATES HOW OLIVER TWIST WAS VERY NEAR GETTING A PLACE WHICH WOULD NOT
HAVE BEEN A SINECURE

For a week after the commission of the impious and profane offence of
asking for more, Oliver remained a close prisoner in the dark and
solitary room to which he had been consigned by the wisdom and mercy of
the board.  It appears, at first sight not unreasonable to suppose,
that, if he had entertained a becoming feeling of respect for the
prediction of the gentleman in the white waistcoat, he would have
established that sage individual's prophetic character, once and for
ever, by tying one end of his pocket-handkerchief to a hook in the
wall, and attaching himself to the other.  To the performance of this
feat, however, there was one obstacle: namely, that
pocket-handkerchiefs being decided articles of luxury, had been, for
all future times and ages, removed from the noses of paupers by the
express order of the board, in council assembled: solemnly given and
pronounced under their hands and seals.  There was a still greater
obstacle in Oliver's youth and childishness.  He only cried bitterly
all day; and, when the long, dismal night came on, spread his little
hands before his eyes to shut out the darkness, and crouching in the
corner, tried to sleep: ever and anon waking with a start and tremble,
and drawing himself closer and closer to the wall, as if to feel even
its cold hard surface were a protection in the gloom and loneliness
which surrounded him.

Let it not be supposed by the enemies of 'the system,' that, during the
period of his solitary incarceration, Oliver was denied the benefit of
exercise, the pleasure of society, or the advantages of religious
consolation.  As for exercise, it was nice cold weather, and he was
allowed to perform his ablutions every morning under the pump, in a
stone yard, in the presence of Mr. Bumble, who prevented his catching
cold, and caused a tingling sensation to pervade his frame, by repeated
applications of the cane.  As for society, he was carried every other
day into the hall where the boys dined, and there sociably flogged as a
public warning and example.  And so far from being denied the
advantages of religious consolation, he was kicked into the same
apartment every evening at prayer-time, and there permitted to listen
to, and console his mind with, a general supplication of the boys,
containing a special clause, therein inserted by authority of the
board, in which they entreated to be made good, virtuous, contented,
and obedient, and to be guarded from the sins and vices of Oliver
Twist: whom the supplication distinctly set forth to be under the
exclusive patronage and protection of the powers of wickedness, and an
article direct from the manufactory of the very Devil himself.

It chanced one morning, while Oliver's affairs were in this auspicious
and comfortable state, that Mr. Gamfield, chimney-sweep, went his way
down the High Street, deeply cogitating in his mind his ways and means
of paying certain arrears of rent, for which his landlord had become
rather pressing.  Mr. Gamfield's most sanguine estimate of his finances
could not raise them within full five pounds of the desired amount;
and, in a species of arithmetical desperation, he was alternately
cudgelling his brains and his donkey, when passing the workhouse, his
eyes encountered the bill on the gate.

'Wo--o!' said Mr. Gamfield to the donkey.

The donkey was in a state of profound abstraction: wondering, probably,
whether he was destined to be regaled with a cabbage-stalk or two when
he had disposed of the two sacks of soot with which the little cart was
laden; so, without noticing the word of command, he jogged onward.

Mr. Gamfield growled a fierce imprecation on the donkey generally, but
more particularly on his eyes; and, running after him, bestowed a blow
on his head, which would inevitably have beaten in any skull but a
donkey's.  Then, catching hold of the bridle, he gave his jaw a sharp
wrench, by way of gentle reminder that he was not his own master; and
by these means turned him round.  He then gave him another blow on the
head, just to stun him till he came back again.  Having completed these
arrangements, he walked up to the gate, to read the bill.

The gentleman with the white waistcoat was standing at the gate with
his hands behind him, after having delivered himself of some profound
sentiments in the board-room.  Having witnessed the little dispute
between Mr. Gamfield and the donkey, he smiled joyously when that
person came up to read the bill, for he saw at once that Mr. Gamfield
was exactly the sort of master Oliver Twist wanted.  Mr. Gamfield
smiled, too, as he perused the document; for five pounds was just the
sum he had been wishing for; and, as to the boy with which it was
encumbered, Mr. Gamfield, knowing what the dietary of the workhouse
was, well knew he would be a nice small pattern, just the very thing
for register stoves.  So, he spelt the bill through again, from
beginning to end; and then, touching his fur cap in token of humility,
accosted the gentleman in the white waistcoat.

'This here boy, sir, wot the parish wants to 'prentis,' said Mr.
Gamfield.

'Ay, my man,' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat, with a
condescending smile.  'What of him?'

'If the parish vould like him to learn a right pleasant trade, in a
good 'spectable chimbley-sweepin' bisness,' said Mr. Gamfield, 'I wants
a 'prentis, and I am ready to take him.'

'Walk in,' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.  Mr. Gamfield
having lingered behind, to give the donkey another blow on the head,
and another wrench of the jaw, as a caution not to run away in his
absence, followed the gentleman with the white waistcoat into the room
where Oliver had first seen him.

'It's a nasty trade,' said Mr. Limbkins, when Gamfield had again stated
his wish.

'Young boys have been smothered in chimneys before now,' said another
gentleman.

'That's acause they damped the straw afore they lit it in the chimbley
to make 'em come down again,' said Gamfield; 'that's all smoke, and no
blaze; vereas smoke ain't o' no use at all in making a boy come down,
for it only sinds him to sleep, and that's wot he likes.  Boys is wery
obstinit, and wery lazy, Gen'l'men, and there's nothink like a good hot
blaze to make 'em come down vith a run.  It's humane too, gen'l'men,
acause, even if they've stuck in the chimbley, roasting their feet
makes 'em struggle to hextricate theirselves.'

The gentleman in the white waistcoat appeared very much amused by this
explanation; but his mirth was speedily checked by a look from Mr.
Limbkins.  The board then proceeded to converse among themselves for a
few minutes, but in so low a tone, that the words 'saving of
expenditure,' 'looked well in the accounts,' 'have a printed report
published,' were alone audible.  These only chanced to be heard,
indeed, or account of their being very frequently repeated with great
emphasis.

At length the whispering ceased; and the members of the board, having
resumed their seats and their solemnity, Mr. Limbkins said:

'We have considered your proposition, and we don't approve of it.'

'Not at all,' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.

'Decidedly not,' added the other members.

As Mr. Gamfield did happen to labour under the slight imputation of
having bruised three or four boys to death already, it occurred to him
that the board had, perhaps, in some unaccountable freak, taken it into
their heads that this extraneous circumstance ought to influence their
proceedings. It was very unlike their general mode of doing business,
if they had; but still, as he had no particular wish to revive the
rumour, he twisted his cap in his hands, and walked slowly from the
table.

'So you won't let me have him, gen'l'men?' said Mr. Gamfield, pausing
near the door.

'No,' replied Mr. Limbkins; 'at least, as it's a nasty business, we
think you ought to take something less than the premium we offered.'

Mr. Gamfield's countenance brightened, as, with a quick step, he
returned to the table, and said,

'What'll you give, gen'l'men?  Come!  Don't be too hard on a poor man.
What'll you give?'

'I should say, three pound ten was plenty,' said Mr. Limbkins.

'Ten shillings too much,' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.

'Come!' said Gamfield; 'say four pound, gen'l'men.  Say four pound, and
you've got rid of him for good and all.  There!'

'Three pound ten,' repeated Mr. Limbkins, firmly.

'Come!  I'll split the diff'erence, gen'l'men,' urged Gamfield. 'Three
pound fifteen.'

'Not a farthing more,' was the firm reply of Mr. Limbkins.

'You're desperate hard upon me, gen'l'men,' said Gamfield, wavering.

'Pooh!  pooh!  nonsense!' said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.
'He'd be cheap with nothing at all, as a premium. Take him, you silly
fellow!  He's just the boy for you.  He wants the stick, now and then:
it'll do him good; and his board needn't come very expensive, for he
hasn't been overfed since he was born.  Ha!  ha!  ha!'

Mr. Gamfield gave an arch look at the faces round the table, and,
observing a smile on all of them, gradually broke into a smile himself.
The bargain was made.  Mr. Bumble, was at once instructed that Oliver
Twist and his indentures were to be conveyed before the magistrate, for
signature and approval, that very afternoon.

In pursuance of this determination, little Oliver, to his excessive
astonishment, was released from bondage, and ordered to put himself
into a clean shirt.  He had hardly achieved this very unusual gymnastic
performance, when Mr. Bumble brought him, with his own hands, a basin
of gruel, and the holiday allowance of two ounces and a quarter of
bread. At this tremendous sight, Oliver began to cry very piteously:
thinking, not unnaturally, that the board must have determined to kill
him for some useful purpose, or they never would have begun to fatten
him up in that way.

'Don't make your eyes red, Oliver, but eat your food and be thankful,'
said Mr. Bumble, in a tone of impressive pomposity. 'You're a going to
be made a 'prentice of, Oliver.'

'A prentice, sir!' said the child, trembling.

'Yes, Oliver,' said Mr. Bumble.  'The kind and blessed gentleman which
is so many parents to you, Oliver, when you have none of your own: are
a going to 'prentice' you: and to set you up in life, and make a man of
you: although the expense to the parish is three pound ten!--three
pound ten, Oliver!--seventy shillins--one hundred and forty
sixpences!--and all for a naughty orphan which nobody can't love.'

As Mr. Bumble paused to take breath, after delivering this address in
an awful voice, the tears rolled down the poor child's face, and he
sobbed bitterly.

'Come,' said Mr. Bumble, somewhat less pompously, for it was gratifying
to his feelings to observe the effect his eloquence had produced;
'Come, Oliver!  Wipe your eyes with the cuffs of your jacket, and don't
cry into your gruel; that's a very foolish action, Oliver.'  It
certainly was, for there was quite enough water in it already.

On their way to the magistrate, Mr. Bumble instructed Oliver that all
he would have to do, would be to look very happy, and say, when the
gentleman asked him if he wanted to be apprenticed, that he should like
it very much indeed; both of which injunctions Oliver promised to obey:
the rather as Mr. Bumble threw in a gentle hint, that if he failed in
either particular, there was no telling what would be done to him. When
they arrived at the office, he was shut up in a little room by himself,
and admonished by Mr. Bumble to stay there, until he came back to fetch
him.

There the boy remained, with a palpitating heart, for half an hour.  At
the expiration of which time Mr. Bumble thrust in his head, unadorned
with the cocked hat, and said aloud:

'Now, Oliver, my dear, come to the gentleman.'  As Mr. Bumble said
this, he put on a grim and threatening look, and added, in a low voice,
'Mind what I told you, you young rascal!'

Oliver stared innocently in Mr. Bumble's face at this somewhat
contradictory style of address; but that gentleman prevented his
offering any remark thereupon, by leading him at once into an adjoining
room: the door of which was open. It was a large room, with a great
window.  Behind a desk, sat two old gentleman with powdered heads: one
of whom was reading the newspaper; while the other was perusing, with
the aid of a pair of tortoise-shell spectacles, a small piece of
parchment which lay before him.  Mr. Limbkins was standing in front of
the desk on one side; and Mr. Gamfield, with a partially washed face,
on the other; while two or three bluff-looking men, in top-boots, were
lounging about.

The old gentleman with the spectacles gradually dozed off, over the
little bit of parchment; and there was a short pause, after Oliver had
been stationed by Mr. Bumble in front of the desk.

'This is the boy, your worship,' said Mr. Bumble.

The old gentleman who was reading the newspaper raised his head for a
moment, and pulled the other old gentleman by the sleeve; whereupon,
the last-mentioned old gentleman woke up.

'Oh, is this the boy?' said the old gentleman.

'This is him, sir,' replied Mr. Bumble.  'Bow to the magistrate, my
dear.'

Oliver roused himself, and made his best obeisance.  He had been
wondering, with his eyes fixed on the magistrates' powder, whether all
boards were born with that white stuff on their heads, and were boards
from thenceforth on that account.

'Well,' said the old gentleman, 'I suppose he's fond of
chimney-sweeping?'

'He doats on it, your worship,' replied Bumble; giving Oliver a sly
pinch, to intimate that he had better not say he didn't.

'And he _will_ be a sweep, will he?' inquired the old gentleman.

'If we was to bind him to any other trade to-morrow, he'd run away
simultaneous, your worship,' replied Bumble.

'And this man that's to be his master--you, sir--you'll treat him well,
and feed him, and do all that sort of thing, will you?' said the old
gentleman.

'When I says I will, I means I will,' replied Mr. Gamfield doggedly.

'You're a rough speaker, my friend, but you look an honest,
open-hearted man,' said the old gentleman: turning his spectacles in
the direction of the candidate for Oliver's premium, whose villainous
countenance was a regular stamped receipt for cruelty.  But the
magistrate was half blind and half childish, so he couldn't reasonably
be expected to discern what other people did.

'I hope I am, sir,' said Mr. Gamfield, with an ugly leer.

'I have no doubt you are, my friend,' replied the old gentleman: fixing
his spectacles more firmly on his nose, and looking about him for the
inkstand.

It was the critical moment of Oliver's fate.  If the inkstand had been
where the old gentleman thought it was, he would have dipped his pen
into it, and signed the indentures, and Oliver would have been
straightway hurried off.  But, as it chanced to be immediately under
his nose, it followed, as a matter of course, that he looked all over
his desk for it, without finding it; and happening in the course of his
search to look straight before him, his gaze encountered the pale and
terrified face of Oliver Twist: who, despite all the admonitory looks
and pinches of Bumble, was regarding the repulsive countenance of his
future master, with a mingled expression of horror and fear, too
palpable to be mistaken, even by a half-blind magistrate.

The old gentleman stopped, laid down his pen, and looked from Oliver to
Mr. Limbkins; who attempted to take snuff with a cheerful and
unconcerned aspect.

'My boy!' said the old gentleman, 'you look pale and alarmed. What is
the matter?'

'Stand a little away from him, Beadle,' said the other magistrate:
laying aside the paper, and leaning forward with an expression of
interest.  'Now, boy, tell us what's the matter: don't be afraid.'

Oliver fell on his knees, and clasping his hands together, prayed that
they would order him back to the dark room--that they would starve
him--beat him--kill him if they pleased--rather than send him away with
that dreadful man.

'Well!' said Mr. Bumble, raising his hands and eyes with most
impressive solemnity.  'Well! of all the artful and designing orphans
that ever I see, Oliver, you are one of the most bare-facedest.'

'Hold your tongue, Beadle,' said the second old gentleman, when Mr.
Bumble had given vent to this compound adjective.

'I beg your worship's pardon,' said Mr. Bumble, incredulous of having
heard aright.  'Did your worship speak to me?'

'Yes.  Hold your tongue.'

Mr. Bumble was stupefied with astonishment.  A beadle ordered to hold
his tongue!  A moral revolution!

The old gentleman in the tortoise-shell spectacles looked at his
companion, he nodded significantly.

'We refuse to sanction these indentures,' said the old gentleman:
tossing aside the piece of parchment as he spoke.

'I hope,' stammered Mr. Limbkins:  'I hope the magistrates will not
form the opinion that the authorities have been guilty of any improper
conduct, on the unsupported testimony of a child.'

'The magistrates are not called upon to pronounce any opinion on the
matter,' said the second old gentleman sharply.  'Take the boy back to
the workhouse, and treat him kindly.  He seems to want it.'

That same evening, the gentleman in the white waistcoat most positively
and decidedly affirmed, not only that Oliver would be hung, but that he
would be drawn and quartered into the bargain. Mr. Bumble shook his
head with gloomy mystery, and said he wished he might come to good;
whereunto Mr. Gamfield replied, that he wished he might come to him;
which, although he agreed with the beadle in most matters, would seem
to be a wish of a totally opposite description.

The next morning, the public were once informed that Oliver Twist was
again To Let, and that five pounds would be paid to anybody who would
take possession of him.



CHAPTER IV

OLIVER, BEING OFFERED ANOTHER PLACE, MAKES HIS FIRST ENTRY INTO PUBLIC
LIFE

In great families, when an advantageous place cannot be obtained,
either in possession, reversion, remainder, or expectancy, for the
young man who is growing up, it is a very general custom to send him to
sea.  The board, in imitation of so wise and salutary an example, took
counsel together on the expediency of shipping off Oliver Twist, in
some small trading vessel bound to a good unhealthy port.  This
suggested itself as the very best thing that could possibly be done
with him: the probability being, that the skipper would flog him to
death, in a playful mood, some day after dinner, or would knock his
brains out with an iron bar; both pastimes being, as is pretty
generally known, very favourite and common recreations among gentleman
of that class.  The more the case presented itself to the board, in
this point of view, the more manifold the advantages of the step
appeared; so, they came to the conclusion that the only way of
providing for Oliver effectually, was to send him to sea without delay.

Mr. Bumble had been despatched to make various preliminary inquiries,
with the view of finding out some captain or other who wanted a
cabin-boy without any friends; and was returning to the workhouse to
communicate the result of his mission; when he encountered at the gate,
no less a person than Mr. Sowerberry, the parochial undertaker.

Mr. Sowerberry was a tall gaunt, large-jointed man, attired in a suit
of threadbare black, with darned cotton stockings of the same colour,
and shoes to answer.  His features were not naturally intended to wear
a smiling aspect, but he was in general rather given to professional
jocosity.  His step was elastic, and his face betokened inward
pleasantry, as he advanced to Mr. Bumble, and shook him cordially by
the hand.

'I have taken the measure of the two women that died last night, Mr.
Bumble,' said the undertaker.

'You'll make your fortune, Mr. Sowerberry,' said the beadle, as he
thrust his thumb and forefinger into the proffered snuff-box of the
undertaker: which was an ingenious little model of a patent coffin.  'I
say you'll make your fortune, Mr. Sowerberry,' repeated Mr. Bumble,
tapping the undertaker on the shoulder, in a friendly manner, with his
cane.

'Think so?' said the undertaker in a tone which half admitted and half
disputed the probability of the event.  'The prices allowed by the
board are very small, Mr. Bumble.'

'So are the coffins,' replied the beadle: with precisely as near an
approach to a laugh as a great official ought to indulge in.

Mr. Sowerberry was much tickled at this: as of course he ought to be;
and laughed a long time without cessation.  'Well, well, Mr. Bumble,'
he said at length, 'there's no denying that, since the new system of
feeding has come in, the coffins are something narrower and more
shallow than they used to be; but we must have some profit, Mr. Bumble.
Well-seasoned timber is an expensive article, sir; and all the iron
handles come, by canal, from Birmingham.'

'Well, well,' said Mr. Bumble, 'every trade has its drawbacks. A fair
profit is, of course, allowable.'

'Of course, of course,' replied the undertaker; 'and if I don't get a
profit upon this or that particular article, why, I make it up in the
long-run, you see--he! he! he!'

'Just so,' said Mr. Bumble.

'Though I must say,' continued the undertaker, resuming the current of
observations which the beadle had interrupted: 'though I must say, Mr.
Bumble, that I have to contend against one very great disadvantage:
which is, that all the stout people go off the quickest.  The people
who have been better off, and have paid rates for many years, are the
first to sink when they come into the house; and let me tell you, Mr.
Bumble, that three or four inches over one's calculation makes a great
hole in one's profits: especially when one has a family to provide for,
sir.'

As Mr. Sowerberry said this, with the becoming indignation of an
ill-used man; and as Mr. Bumble felt that it rather tended to convey a
reflection on the honour of the parish; the latter gentleman thought it
advisable to change the subject.  Oliver Twist being uppermost in his
mind, he made him his theme.

'By the bye,' said Mr. Bumble, 'you don't know anybody who wants a boy,
do you?  A porochial 'prentis, who is at present a dead-weight; a
millstone, as I may say, round the porochial throat?  Liberal terms,
Mr. Sowerberry, liberal terms?'  As Mr. Bumble spoke, he raised his
cane to the bill above him, and gave three distinct raps upon the words
'five pounds':  which were printed thereon in Roman capitals of
gigantic size.

'Gadso!' said the undertaker: taking Mr. Bumble by the gilt-edged
lappel of his official coat; 'that's just the very thing I wanted to
speak to you about.  You know--dear me, what a very elegant button this
is, Mr. Bumble!  I never noticed it before.'

'Yes, I think it rather pretty,' said the beadle, glancing proudly
downwards at the large brass buttons which embellished his coat. 'The
die is the same as the porochial seal--the Good Samaritan healing the
sick and bruised man. The board presented it to me on Newyear's
morning, Mr. Sowerberry.  I put it on, I remember, for the first time,
to attend the inquest on that reduced tradesman, who died in a doorway
at midnight.'

'I recollect,' said the undertaker. 'The jury brought it in, "Died from
exposure to the cold, and want of the common necessaries of life,"
didn't they?'

Mr. Bumble nodded.

'And they made it a special verdict, I think,' said the undertaker, 'by
adding some words to the effect, that if the relieving officer had--'

'Tush!  Foolery!' interposed the beadle.  'If the board attended to all
the nonsense that ignorant jurymen talk, they'd have enough to do.'

'Very true,' said the undertaker; 'they would indeed.'

'Juries,' said Mr. Bumble, grasping his cane tightly, as was his wont
when working into a passion: 'juries is ineddicated, vulgar, grovelling
wretches.'

'So they are,' said the undertaker.

'They haven't no more philosophy nor political economy about 'em than
that,' said the beadle, snapping his fingers contemptuously.

'No more they have,' acquiesced the undertaker.

'I despise 'em,' said the beadle, growing very red in the face.

'So do I,' rejoined the undertaker.

'And I only wish we'd a jury of the independent sort, in the house for
a week or two,' said the beadle; 'the rules and regulations of the
board would soon bring their spirit down for 'em.'

'Let 'em alone for that,' replied the undertaker.  So saying, he
smiled, approvingly: to calm the rising wrath of the indignant parish
officer.

Mr Bumble lifted off his cocked hat; took a handkerchief from the
inside of the crown; wiped from his forehead the perspiration which his
rage had engendered; fixed the cocked hat on again; and, turning to the
undertaker, said in a calmer voice:

'Well; what about the boy?'

'Oh!' replied the undertaker; 'why, you know, Mr. Bumble, I pay a good
deal towards the poor's rates.'

'Hem!' said Mr. Bumble.  'Well?'

'Well,' replied the undertaker, 'I was thinking that if I pay so much
towards 'em, I've a right to get as much out of 'em as I can, Mr.
Bumble; and so--I think I'll take the boy myself.'

Mr. Bumble grasped the undertaker by the arm, and led him into the
building.  Mr. Sowerberry was closeted with the board for five minutes;
and it was arranged that Oliver should go to him that evening 'upon
liking'--a phrase which means, in the case of a parish apprentice, that
if the master find, upon a short trial, that he can get enough work out
of a boy without putting too much food into him, he shall have him for
a term of years, to do what he likes with.

When little Oliver was taken before 'the gentlemen' that evening; and
informed that he was to go, that night, as general house-lad to a
coffin-maker's; and that if he complained of his situation, or ever
came back to the parish again, he would be sent to sea, there to be
drowned, or knocked on the head, as the case might be, he evinced so
little emotion, that they by common consent pronounced him a hardened
young rascal, and ordered Mr. Bumble to remove him forthwith.

Now, although it was very natural that the board, of all people in the
world, should feel in a great state of virtuous astonishment and horror
at the smallest tokens of want of feeling on the part of anybody, they
were rather out, in this particular instance.  The simple fact was,
that Oliver, instead of possessing too little feeling, possessed rather
too much; and was in a fair way of being reduced, for life, to a state
of brutal stupidity and sullenness by the ill usage he had received.
He heard the news of his destination, in perfect silence; and, having
had his luggage put into his hand--which was not very difficult to
carry, inasmuch as it was all comprised within the limits of a brown
paper parcel, about half a foot square by three inches deep--he pulled
his cap over his eyes; and once more attaching himself to Mr. Bumble's
coat cuff, was led away by that dignitary to a new scene of suffering.

For some time, Mr. Bumble drew Oliver along, without notice or remark;
for the beadle carried his head very erect, as a beadle always should:
and, it being a windy day, little Oliver was completely enshrouded by
the skirts of Mr. Bumble's coat as they blew open, and disclosed to
great advantage his flapped waistcoat and drab plush knee-breeches.  As
they drew near to their destination, however, Mr. Bumble thought it
expedient to look down, and see that the boy was in good order for
inspection by his new master: which he accordingly did, with a fit and
becoming air of gracious patronage.

'Oliver!'  said Mr. Bumble.

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver, in a low, tremulous voice.

'Pull that cap off your eyes, and hold up your head, sir.'

Although Oliver did as he was desired, at once; and passed the back of
his unoccupied hand briskly across his eyes, he left a tear in them
when he looked up at his conductor.  As Mr. Bumble gazed sternly upon
him, it rolled down his cheek. It was followed by another, and another.
The child made a strong effort, but it was an unsuccessful one.
Withdrawing his other hand from Mr. Bumble's he covered his face with
both; and wept until the tears sprung out from between his chin and
bony fingers.

'Well!' exclaimed Mr. Bumble, stopping short, and darting at his little
charge a look of intense malignity.  'Well!  Of _all_ the
ungratefullest, and worst-disposed boys as ever I see, Oliver, you are
the--'

'No, no, sir,' sobbed Oliver, clinging to the hand which held the
well-known cane; 'no, no, sir; I will be good indeed; indeed, indeed I
will, sir!  I am a very little boy, sir; and it is so--so--'

'So what?' inquired Mr. Bumble in amazement.

'So lonely, sir!  So very lonely!' cried the child.  'Everybody hates
me.  Oh! sir, don't, don't pray be cross to me!'  The child beat his
hand upon his heart; and looked in his companion's face, with tears of
real agony.

Mr. Bumble regarded Oliver's piteous and helpless look, with some
astonishment, for a few seconds; hemmed three or four times in a husky
manner; and after muttering something about 'that troublesome cough,'
bade Oliver dry his eyes and be a good boy. Then once more taking his
hand, he walked on with him in silence.

The undertaker, who had just put up the shutters of his shop, was
making some entries in his day-book by the light of a most appropriate
dismal candle, when Mr. Bumble entered.

'Aha!' said the undertaker; looking up from the book, and pausing in
the middle of a word; 'is that you, Bumble?'

'No one else, Mr. Sowerberry,' replied the beadle.  'Here! I've brought
the boy.'  Oliver made a bow.

'Oh! that's the boy, is it?' said the undertaker:  raising the candle
above his head, to get a better view of Oliver. 'Mrs. Sowerberry, will
you have the goodness to come here a moment, my dear?'

Mrs. Sowerberry emerged from a little room behind the shop, and
presented the form of a short, then, squeezed-up woman, with a vixenish
countenance.

'My dear,' said Mr. Sowerberry, deferentially, 'this is the boy from
the workhouse that I told you of.'  Oliver bowed again.

'Dear me!' said the undertaker's wife, 'he's very small.'

'Why, he _is_ rather small,' replied Mr. Bumble: looking at Oliver as
if it were his fault that he was no bigger; 'he is small. There's no
denying it.  But he'll grow, Mrs. Sowerberry--he'll grow.'

'Ah!  I dare say he will,' replied the lady pettishly, 'on our victuals
and our drink.  I see no saving in parish children, not I; for they
always cost more to keep, than they're worth. However, men always think
they know best. There!  Get downstairs, little bag o' bones.'  With
this, the undertaker's wife opened a side door, and pushed Oliver down
a steep flight of stairs into a stone cell, damp and dark: forming the
ante-room to the coal-cellar, and denominated 'kitchen'; wherein sat a
slatternly girl, in shoes down at heel, and blue worsted stockings very
much out of repair.

'Here, Charlotte,' said Mr. Sowerberry, who had followed Oliver down,
'give this boy some of the cold bits that were put by for Trip.  He
hasn't come home since the morning, so he may go without 'em.  I dare
say the boy isn't too dainty to eat 'em--are you, boy?'

Oliver, whose eyes had glistened at the mention of meat, and who was
trembling with eagerness to devour it, replied in the negative; and a
plateful of coarse broken victuals was set before him.

I wish some well-fed philosopher, whose meat and drink turn to gall
within him; whose blood is ice, whose heart is iron; could have seen
Oliver Twist clutching at the dainty viands that the dog had neglected.
I wish he could have witnessed the horrible avidity with which Oliver
tore the bits asunder with all the ferocity of famine.  There is only
one thing I should like better; and that would be to see the
Philosopher making the same sort of meal himself, with the same relish.

'Well,' said the undertaker's wife, when Oliver had finished his
supper: which she had regarded in silent horror, and with fearful
auguries of his future appetite: 'have you done?'

There being nothing eatable within his reach, Oliver replied in the
affirmative.

'Then come with me,' said Mrs. Sowerberry: taking up a dim and dirty
lamp, and leading the way upstairs; 'your bed's under the counter.  You
don't mind sleeping among the coffins, I suppose? But it doesn't much
matter whether you do or don't, for you can't sleep anywhere else.
Come; don't keep me here all night!'

Oliver lingered no longer, but meekly followed his new mistress.



CHAPTER V

OLIVER MINGLES WITH NEW ASSOCIATES.  GOING TO A FUNERAL FOR THE FIRST
TIME, HE FORMS AN UNFAVOURABLE NOTION OF HIS MASTER'S BUSINESS

Oliver, being left to himself in the undertaker's shop, set the lamp
down on a workman's bench, and gazed timidly about him with a feeling
of awe and dread, which many people a good deal older than he will be
at no loss to understand.  An unfinished coffin on black tressels,
which stood in the middle of the shop, looked so gloomy and death-like
that a cold tremble came over him, every time his eyes wandered in the
direction of the dismal object: from which he almost expected to see
some frightful form slowly rear its head, to drive him mad with terror.
Against the wall were ranged, in regular array, a long row of elm
boards cut in the same shape: looking in the dim light, like
high-shouldered ghosts with their hands in their breeches pockets.
Coffin-plates, elm-chips, bright-headed nails, and shreds of black
cloth, lay scattered on the floor; and the wall behind the counter was
ornamented with a lively representation of two mutes in very stiff
neckcloths, on duty at a large private door, with a hearse drawn by
four black steeds, approaching in the distance. The shop was close and
hot.  The atmosphere seemed tainted with the smell of coffins.  The
recess beneath the counter in which his flock mattress was thrust,
looked like a grave.

Nor were these the only dismal feelings which depressed Oliver. He was
alone in a strange place; and we all know how chilled and desolate the
best of us will sometimes feel in such a situation. The boy had no
friends to care for, or to care for him.  The regret of no recent
separation was fresh in his mind; the absence of no loved and
well-remembered face sank heavily into his heart.

But his heart was heavy, notwithstanding; and he wished, as he crept
into his narrow bed, that that were his coffin, and that he could be
lain in a calm and lasting sleep in the churchyard ground, with the
tall grass waving gently above his head, and the sound of the old deep
bell to soothe him in his sleep.

Oliver was awakened in the morning, by a loud kicking at the outside of
the shop-door: which, before he could huddle on his clothes, was
repeated, in an angry and impetuous manner, about twenty-five times.
When he began to undo the chain, the legs desisted, and a voice began.

'Open the door, will yer?' cried the voice which belonged to the legs
which had kicked at the door.

'I will, directly, sir,' replied Oliver: undoing the chain, and turning
the key.

'I suppose yer the new boy, ain't yer?' said the voice through the
key-hole.

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver.

'How old are yer?' inquired the voice.

'Ten, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Then I'll whop yer when I get in,' said the voice; 'you just see if I
don't, that's all, my work'us brat!' and having made this obliging
promise, the voice began to whistle.

Oliver had been too often subjected to the process to which the very
expressive monosyllable just recorded bears reference, to entertain the
smallest doubt that the owner of the voice, whoever he might be, would
redeem his pledge, most honourably. He drew back the bolts with a
trembling hand, and opened the door.

For a second or two, Oliver glanced up the street, and down the street,
and over the way: impressed with the belief that the unknown, who had
addressed him through the key-hole, had walked a few paces off, to warm
himself; for nobody did he see but a big charity-boy, sitting on a post
in front of the house, eating a slice of bread and butter: which he cut
into wedges, the size of his mouth, with a clasp-knife, and then
consumed with great dexterity.

'I beg your pardon, sir,' said Oliver at length: seeing that no other
visitor made his appearance; 'did you knock?'

'I kicked,' replied the charity-boy.

'Did you want a coffin, sir?' inquired Oliver, innocently.

At this, the charity-boy looked monstrous fierce; and said that Oliver
would want one before long, if he cut jokes with his superiors in that
way.

'Yer don't know who I am, I suppose, Work'us?' said the charity-boy, in
continuation: descending from the top of the post, meanwhile, with
edifying gravity.

'No, sir,' rejoined Oliver.

'I'm Mister Noah Claypole,' said the charity-boy, 'and you're under me.
Take down the shutters, yer idle young ruffian!' With this, Mr.
Claypole administered a kick to Oliver, and entered the shop with a
dignified air, which did him great credit.  It is difficult for a
large-headed, small-eyed youth, of lumbering make and heavy
countenance, to look dignified under any circumstances; but it is more
especially so, when superadded to these personal attractions are a red
nose and yellow smalls.

Oliver, having taken down the shutters, and broken a pane of glass in
his effort to stagger away beneath the weight of the first one to a
small court at the side of the house in which they were kept during the
day, was graciously assisted by Noah: who having consoled him with the
assurance that 'he'd catch it,' condescended to help him.  Mr.
Sowerberry came down soon after. Shortly afterwards, Mrs. Sowerberry
appeared.  Oliver having 'caught it,' in fulfilment of Noah's
prediction, followed that young gentleman down the stairs to breakfast.

'Come near the fire, Noah,' said Charlotte.  'I saved a nice little bit
of bacon for you from master's breakfast.  Oliver, shut that door at
Mister Noah's back, and take them bits that I've put out on the cover
of the bread-pan.  There's your tea; take it away to that box, and
drink it there, and make haste, for they'll want you to mind the shop.
D'ye hear?'

'D'ye hear, Work'us?' said Noah Claypole.

'Lor, Noah!' said Charlotte, 'what a rum creature you are!  Why don't
you let the boy alone?'

'Let him alone!' said Noah.  'Why everybody lets him alone enough, for
the matter of that.  Neither his father nor his mother will ever
interfere with him.  All his relations let him have his own way pretty
well.  Eh, Charlotte?  He! he! he!'

'Oh, you queer soul!' said Charlotte, bursting into a hearty laugh, in
which she was joined by Noah; after which they both looked scornfully
at poor Oliver Twist, as he sat shivering on the box in the coldest
corner of the room, and ate the stale pieces which had been specially
reserved for him.

Noah was a charity-boy, but not a workhouse orphan.  No chance-child
was he, for he could trace his genealogy all the way back to his
parents, who lived hard by; his mother being a washerwoman, and his
father a drunken soldier, discharged with a wooden leg, and a diurnal
pension of twopence-halfpenny and an unstateable fraction.  The
shop-boys in the neighbourhood had long been in the habit of branding
Noah in the public streets, with the ignominious epithets of
'leathers,' 'charity,' and the like; and Noah had bourne them without
reply.  But, now that fortune had cast in his way a nameless orphan, at
whom even the meanest could point the finger of scorn, he retorted on
him with interest.  This affords charming food for contemplation.  It
shows us what a beautiful thing human nature may be made to be; and how
impartially the same amiable qualities are developed in the finest lord
and the dirtiest charity-boy.

Oliver had been sojourning at the undertaker's some three weeks or a
month.  Mr. and Mrs. Sowerberry--the shop being shut up--were taking
their supper in the little back-parlour, when Mr. Sowerberry, after
several deferential glances at his wife, said,

'My dear--'  He was going to say more; but, Mrs. Sowerberry looking up,
with a peculiarly unpropitious aspect, he stopped short.

'Well,' said Mrs. Sowerberry, sharply.

'Nothing, my dear, nothing,' said Mr. Sowerberry.

'Ugh, you brute!' said Mrs. Sowerberry.

'Not at all, my dear,' said Mr. Sowerberry humbly.  'I thought you
didn't want to hear, my dear.  I was only going to say--'

'Oh, don't tell me what you were going to say,' interposed Mrs.
Sowerberry.  'I am nobody; don't consult me, pray.  _I_ don't want to
intrude upon your secrets.'  As Mrs. Sowerberry said this, she gave an
hysterical laugh, which threatened violent consequences.

'But, my dear,' said Sowerberry, 'I want to ask your advice.'

'No, no, don't ask mine,' replied Mrs. Sowerberry, in an affecting
manner: 'ask somebody else's.'  Here, there was another hysterical
laugh, which frightened Mr. Sowerberry very much.  This is a very
common and much-approved matrimonial course of treatment, which is
often very effective. It at once reduced Mr. Sowerberry to begging, as
a special favour, to be allowed to say what Mrs. Sowerberry was most
curious to hear.  After a short duration, the permission was most
graciously conceded.

'It's only about young Twist, my dear,' said Mr. Sowerberry. 'A very
good-looking boy, that, my dear.'

'He need be, for he eats enough,' observed the lady.

'There's an expression of melancholy in his face, my dear,' resumed Mr.
Sowerberry, 'which is very interesting.  He would make a delightful
mute, my love.'

Mrs. Sowerberry looked up with an expression of considerable
wonderment.  Mr. Sowerberry remarked it and, without allowing time for
any observation on the good lady's part, proceeded.

'I don't mean a regular mute to attend grown-up people, my dear, but
only for children's practice.  It would be very new to have a mute in
proportion, my dear.  You may depend upon it, it would have a superb
effect.'

Mrs. Sowerberry, who had a good deal of taste in the undertaking way,
was much struck by the novelty of this idea; but, as it would have been
compromising her dignity to have said so, under existing circumstances,
she merely inquired, with much sharpness, why such an obvious
suggestion had not presented itself to her husband's mind before?  Mr.
Sowerberry rightly construed this, as an acquiescence in his
proposition; it was speedily determined, therefore, that Oliver should
be at once initiated into the mysteries of the trade; and, with this
view, that he should accompany his master on the very next occasion of
his services being required.

The occasion was not long in coming.  Half an hour after breakfast next
morning, Mr. Bumble entered the shop; and supporting his cane against
the counter, drew forth his large leathern pocket-book: from which he
selected a small scrap of paper, which he handed over to Sowerberry.

'Aha!' said the undertaker, glancing over it with a lively countenance;
'an order for a coffin, eh?'

'For a coffin first, and a porochial funeral afterwards,' replied Mr.
Bumble, fastening the strap of the leathern pocket-book: which, like
himself, was very corpulent.

'Bayton,' said the undertaker, looking from the scrap of paper to Mr.
Bumble.  'I never heard the name before.'

Bumble shook his head, as he replied, 'Obstinate people, Mr.
Sowerberry; very obstinate.  Proud, too, I'm afraid, sir.'

'Proud, eh?' exclaimed Mr. Sowerberry with a sneer.  'Come, that's too
much.'

'Oh, it's sickening,' replied the beadle.  'Antimonial, Mr. Sowerberry!'

'So it is,' acquiesced the undertaker.

'We only heard of the family the night before last,' said the beadle;
'and we shouldn't have known anything about them, then, only a woman
who lodges in the same house made an application to the porochial
committee for them to send the porochial surgeon to see a woman as was
very bad.  He had gone out to dinner; but his 'prentice (which is a
very clever lad) sent 'em some medicine in a blacking-bottle, offhand.'

'Ah, there's promptness,' said the undertaker.

'Promptness, indeed!' replied the beadle.  'But what's the consequence;
what's the ungrateful behaviour of these rebels, sir?  Why, the husband
sends back word that the medicine won't suit his wife's complaint, and
so she shan't take it--says she shan't take it, sir!  Good, strong,
wholesome medicine, as was given with great success to two Irish
labourers and a coal-heaver, only a week before--sent 'em for nothing,
with a blackin'-bottle in,--and he sends back word that she shan't take
it, sir!'

As the atrocity presented itself to Mr. Bumble's mind in full force, he
struck the counter sharply with his cane, and became flushed with
indignation.

'Well,' said the undertaker, 'I ne--ver--did--'

'Never did, sir!' ejaculated the beadle.  'No, nor nobody never did;
but now she's dead, we've got to bury her; and that's the direction;
and the sooner it's done, the better.'

Thus saying, Mr. Bumble put on his cocked hat wrong side first, in a
fever of parochial excitement; and flounced out of the shop.

'Why, he was so angry, Oliver, that he forgot even to ask after you!'
said Mr. Sowerberry, looking after the beadle as he strode down the
street.

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver, who had carefully kept himself out of
sight, during the interview; and who was shaking from head to foot at
the mere recollection of the sound of Mr. Bumble's voice.

He needn't haven taken the trouble to shrink from Mr. Bumble's glance,
however; for that functionary, on whom the prediction of the gentleman
in the white waistcoat had made a very strong impression, thought that
now the undertaker had got Oliver upon trial the subject was better
avoided, until such time as he should be firmly bound for seven years,
and all danger of his being returned upon the hands of the parish
should be thus effectually and legally overcome.

'Well,' said Mr. Sowerberry, taking up his hat, 'the sooner this job is
done, the better.  Noah, look after the shop. Oliver, put on your cap,
and come with me.'  Oliver obeyed, and followed his master on his
professional mission.

They walked on, for some time, through the most crowded and densely
inhabited part of the town; and then, striking down a narrow street
more dirty and miserable than any they had yet passed through, paused
to look for the house which was the object of their search.  The houses
on either side were high and large, but very old, and tenanted by
people of the poorest class: as their neglected appearance would have
sufficiently denoted, without the concurrent testimony afforded by the
squalid looks of the few men and women who, with folded arms and bodies
half doubled, occasionally skulked along.  A great many of the
tenements had shop-fronts; but these were fast closed, and mouldering
away; only the upper rooms being inhabited.  Some houses which had
become insecure from age and decay, were prevented from falling into
the street, by huge beams of wood reared against the walls, and firmly
planted in the road; but even these crazy dens seemed to have been
selected as the nightly haunts of some houseless wretches, for many of
the rough boards which supplied the place of door and window, were
wrenched from their positions, to afford an aperture wide enough for
the passage of a human body.  The kennel was stagnant and filthy. The
very rats, which here and there lay putrefying in its rottenness, were
hideous with famine.

There was neither knocker nor bell-handle at the open door where Oliver
and his master stopped; so, groping his way cautiously through the dark
passage, and bidding Oliver keep close to him and not be afraid the
undertaker mounted to the top of the first flight of stairs.  Stumbling
against a door on the landing, he rapped at it with his knuckles.

It was opened by a young girl of thirteen or fourteen.  The undertaker
at once saw enough of what the room contained, to know it was the
apartment to which he had been directed.  He stepped in; Oliver
followed him.

There was no fire in the room; but a man was crouching, mechanically,
over the empty stove.  An old woman, too, had drawn a low stool to the
cold hearth, and was sitting beside him. There were some ragged
children in another corner; and in a small recess, opposite the door,
there lay upon the ground, something covered with an old blanket.
Oliver shuddered as he cast his eyes toward the place, and crept
involuntarily closer to his master; for though it was covered up, the
boy felt that it was a corpse.

The man's face was thin and very pale; his hair and beard were grizzly;
his eyes were bloodshot.  The old woman's face was wrinkled; her two
remaining teeth protruded over her under lip; and her eyes were bright
and piercing.  Oliver was afraid to look at either her or the man.
They seemed so like the rats he had seen outside.

'Nobody shall go near her,' said the man, starting fiercely up, as the
undertaker approached the recess. 'Keep back! Damn you, keep back, if
you've a life to lose!'

'Nonsense, my good man,' said the undertaker, who was pretty well used
to misery in all its shapes.  'Nonsense!'

'I tell you,' said the man:  clenching his hands, and stamping
furiously on the floor,--'I tell you I won't have her put into the
ground.  She couldn't rest there.  The worms would worry her--not eat
her--she is so worn away.'

The undertaker offered no reply to this raving; but producing a tape
from his pocket, knelt down for a moment by the side of the body.

'Ah!' said the man: bursting into tears, and sinking on his knees at
the feet of the dead woman; 'kneel down, kneel down--kneel round her,
every one of you, and mark my words!  I say she was starved to death.
I never knew how bad she was, till the fever came upon her; and then
her bones were starting through the skin.  There was neither fire nor
candle; she died in the dark--in the dark!  She couldn't even see her
children's faces, though we heard her gasping out their names. I begged
for her in the streets: and they sent me to prison. When I came back,
she was dying; and all the blood in my heart has dried up, for they
starved her to death.  I swear it before the God that saw it! They
starved her!'  He twined his hands in his hair; and, with a loud
scream, rolled grovelling upon the floor: his eyes fixed, and the foam
covering his lips.

The terrified children cried bitterly; but the old woman, who had
hitherto remained as quiet as if she had been wholly deaf to all that
passed, menaced them into silence.  Having unloosened the cravat of the
man who still remained extended on the ground, she tottered towards the
undertaker.

'She was my daughter,' said the old woman, nodding her head in the
direction of the corpse; and speaking with an idiotic leer, more
ghastly than even the presence of death in such a place. 'Lord, Lord!
Well, it _is_ strange that I who gave birth to her, and was a woman
then, should be alive and merry now, and she lying there: so cold and
stiff!  Lord, Lord!--to think of it; it's as good as a play--as good as
a play!'

As the wretched creature mumbled and chuckled in her hideous merriment,
the undertaker turned to go away.

'Stop, stop!' said the old woman in a loud whisper.  'Will she be
buried to-morrow, or next day, or to-night?  I laid her out; and I must
walk, you know.  Send me a large cloak: a good warm one: for it is
bitter cold.  We should have cake and wine, too, before we go!  Never
mind; send some bread--only a loaf of bread and a cup of water.  Shall
we have some bread, dear?' she said eagerly: catching at the
undertaker's coat, as he once more moved towards the door.

'Yes, yes,' said the undertaker,'of course.  Anything you like!' He
disengaged himself from the old woman's grasp; and, drawing Oliver
after him, hurried away.

The next day, (the family having been meanwhile relieved with a
half-quartern loaf and a piece of cheese, left with them by Mr. Bumble
himself,) Oliver and his master returned to the miserable abode; where
Mr. Bumble had already arrived, accompanied by four men from the
workhouse, who were to act as bearers.  An old black cloak had been
thrown over the rags of the old woman and the man; and the bare coffin
having been screwed down, was hoisted on the shoulders of the bearers,
and carried into the street.

'Now, you must put your best leg foremost, old lady!' whispered
Sowerberry in the old woman's ear; 'we are rather late; and it won't
do, to keep the clergyman waiting.  Move on, my men,--as quick as you
like!'

Thus directed, the bearers trotted on under their light burden; and the
two mourners kept as near them, as they could.  Mr. Bumble and
Sowerberry walked at a good smart pace in front; and Oliver, whose legs
were not so long as his master's, ran by the side.

There was not so great a necessity for hurrying as Mr. Sowerberry had
anticipated, however; for when they reached the obscure corner of the
churchyard in which the nettles grew, and where the parish graves were
made, the clergyman had not arrived; and the clerk, who was sitting by
the vestry-room fire, seemed to think it by no means improbable that it
might be an hour or so, before he came.  So, they put the bier on the
brink of the grave; and the two mourners waited patiently in the damp
clay, with a cold rain drizzling down, while the ragged boys whom the
spectacle had attracted into the churchyard played a noisy game at
hide-and-seek among the tombstones, or varied their amusements by
jumping backwards and forwards over the coffin.  Mr. Sowerberry and
Bumble, being personal friends of the clerk, sat by the fire with him,
and read the paper.

At length, after a lapse of something more than an hour, Mr. Bumble,
and Sowerberry, and the clerk, were seen running towards the grave.
Immediately afterwards, the clergyman appeared: putting on his surplice
as he came along.  Mr. Bumble then thrashed a boy or two, to keep up
appearances; and the reverend gentleman, having read as much of the
burial service as could be compressed into four minutes, gave his
surplice to the clerk, and walked away again.

'Now, Bill!' said Sowerberry to the grave-digger. 'Fill up!'

It was no very difficult task, for the grave was so full, that the
uppermost coffin was within a few feet of the surface.  The
grave-digger shovelled in the earth; stamped it loosely down with his
feet: shouldered his spade; and walked off, followed by the boys, who
murmured very loud complaints at the fun being over so soon.

'Come, my good fellow!' said Bumble, tapping the man on the back. 'They
want to shut up the yard.'

The man who had never once moved, since he had taken his station by the
grave side, started, raised his head, stared at the person who had
addressed him, walked forward for a few paces; and fell down in a
swoon.  The crazy old woman was too much occupied in bewailing the loss
of her cloak (which the undertaker had taken off), to pay him any
attention; so they threw a can of cold water over him; and when he came
to, saw him safely out of the churchyard, locked the gate, and departed
on their different ways.

'Well, Oliver,' said Sowerberry, as they walked home, 'how do you like
it?'

'Pretty well, thank you, sir' replied Oliver, with considerable
hesitation.  'Not very much, sir.'

'Ah, you'll get used to it in time, Oliver,' said Sowerberry. 'Nothing
when you _are_ used to it, my boy.'

Oliver wondered, in his own mind, whether it had taken a very long time
to get Mr. Sowerberry used to it.  But he thought it better not to ask
the question; and walked back to the shop: thinking over all he had
seen and heard.



CHAPTER VI

OLIVER, BEING GOADED BY THE TAUNTS OF NOAH, ROUSES INTO ACTION, AND
RATHER ASTONISHES HIM

The month's trial over, Oliver was formally apprenticed.  It was a nice
sickly season just at this time.  In commercial phrase, coffins were
looking up; and, in the course of a few weeks, Oliver acquired a great
deal of experience.  The success of Mr. Sowerberry's ingenious
speculation, exceeded even his most sanguine hopes.  The oldest
inhabitants recollected no period at which measles had been so
prevalent, or so fatal to infant existence; and many were the mournful
processions which little Oliver headed, in a hat-band reaching down to
his knees, to the indescribable admiration and emotion of all the
mothers in the town.  As Oliver accompanied his master in most of his
adult expeditions too, in order that he might acquire that equanimity
of demeanour and full command of nerve which was essential to a
finished undertaker, he had many opportunities of observing the
beautiful resignation and fortitude with which some strong-minded
people bear their trials and losses.

For instance; when Sowerberry had an order for the burial of some rich
old lady or gentleman, who was surrounded by a great number of nephews
and nieces, who had been perfectly inconsolable during the previous
illness, and whose grief had been wholly irrepressible even on the most
public occasions, they would be as happy among themselves as need
be--quite cheerful and contented--conversing together with as much
freedom and gaiety, as if nothing whatever had happened to disturb
them.  Husbands, too, bore the loss of their wives with the most heroic
calmness. Wives, again, put on weeds for their husbands, as if, so far
from grieving in the garb of sorrow, they had made up their minds to
render it as becoming and attractive as possible.  It was observable,
too, that ladies and gentlemen who were in passions of anguish during
the ceremony of interment, recovered almost as soon as they reached
home, and became quite composed before the tea-drinking was over.  All
this was very pleasant and improving to see; and Oliver beheld it with
great admiration.

That Oliver Twist was moved to resignation by the example of these good
people, I cannot, although I am his biographer, undertake to affirm
with any degree of confidence; but I can most distinctly say, that for
many months he continued meekly to submit to the domination and
ill-treatment of Noah Claypole: who used him far worse than before, now
that his jealousy was roused by seeing the new boy promoted to the
black stick and hatband, while he, the old one, remained stationary in
the muffin-cap and leathers.  Charlotte treated him ill, because Noah
did; and Mrs. Sowerberry was his decided enemy, because Mr. Sowerberry
was disposed to be his friend; so, between these three on one side, and
a glut of funerals on the other, Oliver was not altogether as
comfortable as the hungry pig was, when he was shut up, by mistake, in
the grain department of a brewery.

And now, I come to a very important passage in Oliver's history; for I
have to record an act, slight and unimportant perhaps in appearance,
but which indirectly produced a material change in all his future
prospects and proceedings.

One day, Oliver and Noah had descended into the kitchen at the usual
dinner-hour, to banquet upon a small joint of mutton--a pound and a
half of the worst end of the neck--when Charlotte being called out of
the way, there ensued a brief interval of time, which Noah Claypole,
being hungry and vicious, considered he could not possibly devote to a
worthier purpose than aggravating and tantalising young Oliver Twist.

Intent upon this innocent amusement, Noah put his feet on the
table-cloth; and pulled Oliver's hair; and twitched his ears; and
expressed his opinion that he was a 'sneak'; and furthermore announced
his intention of coming to see him hanged, whenever that desirable
event should take place; and entered upon various topics of petty
annoyance, like a malicious and ill-conditioned charity-boy as he was.
But, making Oliver cry, Noah attempted to be more facetious still; and
in his attempt, did what many sometimes do to this day, when they want
to be funny.  He got rather personal.

'Work'us,' said Noah, 'how's your mother?'

'She's dead,' replied Oliver; 'don't you say anything about her to me!'

Oliver's colour rose as he said this; he breathed quickly; and there
was a curious working of the mouth and nostrils, which Mr. Claypole
thought must be the immediate precursor of a violent fit of crying.
Under this impression he returned to the charge.

'What did she die of, Work'us?' said Noah.

'Of a broken heart, some of our old nurses told me,' replied Oliver:
more as if he were talking to himself, than answering Noah. 'I think I
know what it must be to die of that!'

'Tol de rol lol lol, right fol lairy, Work'us,' said Noah, as a tear
rolled down Oliver's cheek.  'What's set you a snivelling now?'

'Not _you_,' replied Oliver, sharply. 'There; that's enough. Don't say
anything more to me about her; you'd better not!'

'Better not!' exclaimed Noah. 'Well!  Better not!  Work'us, don't be
impudent.  _Your_ mother, too!  She was a nice 'un she was.  Oh, Lor!'
And here, Noah nodded his head expressively; and curled up as much of
his small red nose as muscular action could collect together, for the
occasion.

'Yer know, Work'us,' continued Noah, emboldened by Oliver's silence,
and speaking in a jeering tone of affected pity: of all tones the most
annoying: 'Yer know, Work'us, it can't be helped now; and of course yer
couldn't help it then; and I am very sorry for it; and I'm sure we all
are, and pity yer very much.  But yer must know, Work'us, yer mother
was a regular right-down bad 'un.'

'What did you say?' inquired Oliver, looking up very quickly.

'A regular right-down bad 'un, Work'us,' replied Noah, coolly. 'And
it's a great deal better, Work'us, that she died when she did, or else
she'd have been hard labouring in Bridewell, or transported, or hung;
which is more likely than either, isn't it?'

Crimson with fury, Oliver started up; overthrew the chair and table;
seized Noah by the throat; shook him, in the violence of his rage, till
his teeth chattered in his head; and collecting his whole force into
one heavy blow, felled him to the ground.

A minute ago, the boy had looked the quiet child, mild, dejected
creature that harsh treatment had made him.  But his spirit was roused
at last; the cruel insult to his dead mother had set his blood on fire.
His breast heaved; his attitude was erect; his eye bright and vivid;
his whole person changed, as he stood glaring over the cowardly
tormentor who now lay crouching at his feet; and defied him with an
energy he had never known before.

'He'll murder me!' blubbered Noah.  'Charlotte!  missis!  Here's the
new boy a murdering of me!  Help! help!  Oliver's gone mad!
Char--lotte!'

Noah's shouts were responded to, by a loud scream from Charlotte, and a
louder from Mrs. Sowerberry; the former of whom rushed into the kitchen
by a side-door, while the latter paused on the staircase till she was
quite certain that it was consistent with the preservation of human
life, to come further down.

'Oh, you little wretch!' screamed Charlotte: seizing Oliver with her
utmost force, which was about equal to that of a moderately strong man
in particularly good training.  'Oh, you little un-grate-ful,
mur-de-rous, hor-rid villain!'  And between every syllable, Charlotte
gave Oliver a blow with all her might: accompanying it with a scream,
for the benefit of society.

Charlotte's fist was by no means a light one; but, lest it should not
be effectual in calming Oliver's wrath, Mrs. Sowerberry plunged into
the kitchen, and assisted to hold him with one hand, while she
scratched his face with the other. In this favourable position of
affairs, Noah rose from the ground, and pommelled him behind.

This was rather too violent exercise to last long.  When they were all
wearied out, and could tear and beat no longer, they dragged Oliver,
struggling and shouting, but nothing daunted, into the dust-cellar, and
there locked him up.  This being done, Mrs. Sowerberry sunk into a
chair, and burst into tears.

'Bless her, she's going off!' said Charlotte.  'A glass of water, Noah,
dear.  Make haste!'

'Oh!  Charlotte,' said Mrs. Sowerberry:  speaking as well as she could,
through a deficiency of breath, and a sufficiency of cold water, which
Noah had poured over her head and shoulders.  'Oh! Charlotte, what a
mercy we have not all been murdered in our beds!'

'Ah! mercy indeed, ma'am,' was the reply.  I only hope this'll teach
master not to have any more of these dreadful creatures, that are born
to be murderers and robbers from their very cradle. Poor Noah!  He was
all but killed, ma'am, when I come in.'

'Poor fellow!' said Mrs. Sowerberry: looking piteously on the
charity-boy.

Noah, whose top waistcoat-button might have been somewhere on a level
with the crown of Oliver's head, rubbed his eyes with the inside of his
wrists while this commiseration was bestowed upon him, and performed
some affecting tears and sniffs.

'What's to be done!' exclaimed Mrs. Sowerberry.  'Your master's not at
home; there's not a man in the house, and he'll kick that door down in
ten minutes.'  Oliver's vigorous plunges against the bit of timber in
question, rendered this occurance highly probable.

'Dear, dear!  I don't know, ma'am,' said Charlotte, 'unless we send for
the police-officers.'

'Or the millingtary,' suggested Mr. Claypole.

'No, no,' said Mrs. Sowerberry: bethinking herself of Oliver's old
friend.  'Run to Mr. Bumble, Noah, and tell him to come here directly,
and not to lose a minute; never mind your cap!  Make haste!  You can
hold a knife to that black eye, as you run along. It'll keep the
swelling down.'

Noah stopped to make no reply, but started off at his fullest speed;
and very much it astonished the people who were out walking, to see a
charity-boy tearing through the streets pell-mell, with no cap on his
head, and a clasp-knife at his eye.



CHAPTER VII

OLIVER CONTINUES REFRACTORY

Noah Claypole ran along the streets at his swiftest pace, and paused
not once for breath, until he reached the workhouse-gate. Having rested
here, for a minute or so, to collect a good burst of sobs and an
imposing show of tears and terror, he knocked loudly at the wicket; and
presented such a rueful face to the aged pauper who opened it, that
even he, who saw nothing but rueful faces about him at the best of
times, started back in astonishment.

'Why, what's the matter with the boy!' said the old pauper.

'Mr. Bumble!  Mr. Bumble!' cried Noah, with well-affected dismay: and
in tones so loud and agitated, that they not only caught the ear of Mr.
Bumble himself, who happened to be hard by, but alarmed him so much
that he rushed into the yard without his cocked hat,--which is a very
curious and remarkable circumstance: as showing that even a beadle,
acted upon a sudden and powerful impulse, may be afflicted with a
momentary visitation of loss of self-possession, and forgetfulness of
personal dignity.

'Oh, Mr. Bumble, sir!' said Noah:  'Oliver, sir,--Oliver has--'

'What?  What?' interposed Mr. Bumble: with a gleam of pleasure in his
metallic eyes. 'Not run away; he hasn't run away, has he, Noah?'

'No, sir, no.  Not run away, sir, but he's turned wicious,' replied
Noah. 'He tried to murder me, sir; and then he tried to murder
Charlotte; and then missis.  Oh! what dreadful pain it is!

Such agony, please, sir!'  And here, Noah writhed and twisted his body
into an extensive variety of eel-like positions; thereby giving Mr.
Bumble to understand that, from the violent and sanguinary onset of
Oliver Twist, he had sustained severe internal injury and damage, from
which he was at that moment suffering the acutest torture.

When Noah saw that the intelligence he communicated perfectly paralysed
Mr. Bumble, he imparted additional effect thereunto, by bewailing his
dreadful wounds ten times louder than before; and when he observed a
gentleman in a white waistcoat crossing the yard, he was more tragic in
his lamentations than ever: rightly conceiving it highly expedient to
attract the notice, and rouse the indignation, of the gentleman
aforesaid.

The gentleman's notice was very soon attracted; for he had not walked
three paces, when he turned angrily round, and inquired what that young
cur was howling for, and why Mr. Bumble did not favour him with
something which would render the series of vocular exclamations so
designated, an involuntary process?

'It's a poor boy from the free-school, sir,' replied Mr. Bumble, 'who
has been nearly murdered--all but murdered, sir,--by young Twist.'

'By Jove!' exclaimed the gentleman in the white waistcoat, stopping
short.  'I knew it!  I felt a strange presentiment from the very first,
that that audacious young savage would come to be hung!'

'He has likewise attempted, sir, to murder the female servant,' said
Mr. Bumble, with a face of ashy paleness.

'And his missis,' interposed Mr. Claypole.

'And his master, too, I think you said, Noah?' added Mr. Bumble.

'No! he's out, or he would have murdered him,' replied Noah. 'He said
he wanted to.'

'Ah!  Said he wanted to, did he, my boy?' inquired the gentleman in the
white waistcoat.

'Yes, sir,' replied Noah.  'And please, sir, missis wants to know
whether Mr. Bumble can spare time to step up there, directly, and flog
him--'cause master's out.'

'Certainly, my boy; certainly,' said the gentleman in the white
waistcoat: smiling benignly, and patting Noah's head, which was about
three inches higher than his own.  'You're a good boy--a very good boy.
Here's a penny for you.  Bumble, just step up to Sowerberry's with your
cane, and see what's best to be done. Don't spare him, Bumble.'

'No, I will not, sir,' replied the beadle.  And the cocked hat and cane
having been, by this time, adjusted to their owner's satisfaction, Mr.
Bumble and Noah Claypole betook themselves with all speed to the
undertaker's shop.

Here the position of affairs had not at all improved.  Sowerberry had
not yet returned, and Oliver continued to kick, with undiminished
vigour, at the cellar-door.  The accounts of his ferocity as related by
Mrs. Sowerberry and Charlotte, were of so startling a nature, that Mr.
Bumble judged it prudent to parley, before opening the door.  With this
view he gave a kick at the outside, by way of prelude; and, then,
applying his mouth to the keyhole, said, in a deep and impressive tone:

'Oliver!'

'Come; you let me out!' replied Oliver, from the inside.

'Do you know this here voice, Oliver?' said Mr. Bumble.

'Yes,' replied Oliver.

'Ain't you afraid of it, sir?  Ain't you a-trembling while I speak,
sir?' said Mr. Bumble.

'No!' replied Oliver, boldly.

An answer so different from the one he had expected to elicit, and was
in the habit of receiving, staggered Mr. Bumble not a little.  He
stepped back from the keyhole; drew himself up to his full height; and
looked from one to another of the three bystanders, in mute
astonishment.

'Oh, you know, Mr. Bumble, he must be mad,' said Mrs. Sowerberry.

'No boy in half his senses could venture to speak so to you.'

'It's not Madness, ma'am,' replied Mr. Bumble, after a few moments of
deep meditation.  'It's Meat.'

'What?' exclaimed Mrs. Sowerberry.

'Meat, ma'am, meat,' replied Bumble, with stern emphasis. 'You've
over-fed him, ma'am.  You've raised a artificial soul and spirit in
him, ma'am unbecoming a person of his condition: as the board, Mrs.
Sowerberry, who are practical philosophers, will tell you.  What have
paupers to do with soul or spirit?  It's quite enough that we let 'em
have live bodies.  If you had kept the boy on gruel, ma'am, this would
never have happened.'

'Dear, dear!' ejaculated Mrs. Sowerberry, piously raising her eyes to
the kitchen ceiling: 'this comes of being liberal!'

The liberality of Mrs. Sowerberry to Oliver, had consisted of a profuse
bestowal upon him of all the dirty odds and ends which nobody else
would eat; so there was a great deal of meekness and self-devotion in
her voluntarily remaining under Mr. Bumble's heavy accusation.  Of
which, to do her justice, she was wholly innocent, in thought, word, or
deed.

'Ah!' said Mr. Bumble, when the lady brought her eyes down to earth
again; 'the only thing that can be done now, that I know of, is to
leave him in the cellar for a day or so, till he's a little starved
down; and then to take him out, and keep him on gruel all through the
apprenticeship.  He comes of a bad family. Excitable natures, Mrs.
Sowerberry!  Both the nurse and doctor said, that that mother of his
made her way here, against difficulties and pain that would have killed
any well-disposed woman, weeks before.'

At this point of Mr. Bumble's discourse, Oliver, just hearing enough to
know that some allusion was being made to his mother, recommenced
kicking, with a violence that rendered every other sound inaudible.
Sowerberry returned at this juncture.  Oliver's offence having been
explained to him, with such exaggerations as the ladies thought best
calculated to rouse his ire, he unlocked the cellar-door in a
twinkling, and dragged his rebellious apprentice out, by the collar.

Oliver's clothes had been torn in the beating he had received; his face
was bruised and scratched; and his hair scattered over his forehead.
The angry flush had not disappeared, however; and when he was pulled
out of his prison, he scowled boldly on Noah, and looked quite
undismayed.

'Now, you are a nice young fellow, ain't you?' said Sowerberry; giving
Oliver a shake, and a box on the ear.

'He called my mother names,' replied Oliver.

'Well, and what if he did, you little ungrateful wretch?' said Mrs.
Sowerberry.  'She deserved what he said, and worse.'

'She didn't' said Oliver.

'She did,' said Mrs. Sowerberry.

'It's a lie!' said Oliver.

Mrs. Sowerberry burst into a flood of tears.

This flood of tears left Mr. Sowerberry no alternative.  If he had
hesitated for one instant to punish Oliver most severely, it must be
quite clear to every experienced reader that he would have been,
according to all precedents in disputes of matrimony established, a
brute, an unnatural husband, an insulting creature, a base imitation of
a man, and various other agreeable characters too numerous for recital
within the limits of this chapter.  To do him justice, he was, as far
as his power went--it was not very extensive--kindly disposed towards
the boy; perhaps, because it was his interest to be so; perhaps,
because his wife disliked him. The flood of tears, however, left him no
resource; so he at once gave him a drubbing, which satisfied even Mrs.
Sowerberry herself, and rendered Mr. Bumble's subsequent application of
the parochial cane, rather unnecessary.  For the rest of the day, he
was shut up in the back kitchen, in company with a pump and a slice of
bread; and at night, Mrs. Sowerberry, after making various remarks
outside the door, by no means complimentary to the memory of his
mother, looked into the room, and, amidst the jeers and pointings of
Noah and Charlotte, ordered him upstairs to his dismal bed.

It was not until he was left alone in the silence and stillness of the
gloomy workshop of the undertaker, that Oliver gave way to the feelings
which the day's treatment may be supposed likely to have awakened in a
mere child.  He had listened to their taunts with a look of contempt;
he had borne the lash without a cry: for he felt that pride swelling in
his heart which would have kept down a shriek to the last, though they
had roasted him alive.  But now, when there were none to see or hear
him, he fell upon his knees on the floor; and, hiding his face in his
hands, wept such tears as, God send for the credit of our nature, few
so young may ever have cause to pour out before him!

For a long time, Oliver remained motionless in this attitude. The
candle was burning low in the socket when he rose to his feet. Having
gazed cautiously round him, and listened intently, he gently undid the
fastenings of the door, and looked abroad.

It was a cold, dark night.  The stars seemed, to the boy's eyes,
farther from the earth than he had ever seen them before; there was no
wind; and the sombre shadows thrown by the trees upon the ground,
looked sepulchral and death-like, from being so still. He softly
reclosed the door.  Having availed himself of the expiring light of the
candle to tie up in a handkerchief the few articles of wearing apparel
he had, sat himself down upon a bench, to wait for morning.

With the first ray of light that struggled through the crevices in the
shutters, Oliver arose, and again unbarred the door.  One timid look
around--one moment's pause of hesitation--he had closed it behind him,
and was in the open street.

He looked to the right and to the left, uncertain whither to fly.

He remembered to have seen the waggons, as they went out, toiling up
the hill.  He took the same route; and arriving at a footpath across
the fields: which he knew, after some distance, led out again into the
road; struck into it, and walked quickly on.

Along this same footpath, Oliver well-remembered he had trotted beside
Mr. Bumble, when he first carried him to the workhouse from the farm.
His way lay directly in front of the cottage. His heart beat quickly
when he bethought himself of this; and he half resolved to turn back.
He had come a long way though, and should lose a great deal of time by
doing so.  Besides, it was so early that there was very little fear of
his being seen; so he walked on.

He reached the house.  There was no appearance of its inmates stirring
at that early hour.  Oliver stopped, and peeped into the garden.  A
child was weeding one of the little beds; as he stopped, he raised his
pale face and disclosed the features of one of his former companions.
Oliver felt glad to see him, before he went; for, though younger than
himself, he had been his little friend and playmate.  They had been
beaten, and starved, and shut up together, many and many a time.

'Hush, Dick!' said Oliver, as the boy ran to the gate, and thrust his
thin arm between the rails to greet him.  'Is any one up?'

'Nobody but me,' replied the child.

'You musn't say you saw me, Dick,' said Oliver.  'I am running away.
They beat and ill-use me, Dick; and I am going to seek my fortune, some
long way off.  I don't know where.  How pale you are!'

'I heard the doctor tell them I was dying,' replied the child with a
faint smile.  'I am very glad to see you, dear; but don't stop, don't
stop!'

'Yes, yes, I will, to say good-b'ye to you,' replied Oliver. 'I shall
see you again, Dick.  I know I shall!  You will be well and happy!'

'I hope so,' replied the child.  'After I am dead, but not before.  I
know the doctor must be right, Oliver, because I dream so much of
Heaven, and Angels, and kind faces that I never see when I am awake.
Kiss me,' said the child,  climbing up the low gate, and flinging his
little arms round Oliver's neck. 'Good-b'ye, dear!  God bless you!'

The blessing was from a young child's lips, but it was the first that
Oliver had ever heard invoked upon his head; and through the struggles
and sufferings, and troubles and changes, of his after life, he never
once forgot it.



CHAPTER VIII

OLIVER WALKS TO LONDON.  HE ENCOUNTERS ON THE ROAD A STRANGE SORT OF
YOUNG GENTLEMAN

Oliver reached the stile at which the by-path terminated; and once more
gained the high-road.  It was eight o'clock now. Though he was nearly
five miles away from the town, he ran, and hid behind the hedges, by
turns, till noon: fearing that he might be pursued and overtaken.  Then
he sat down to rest by the side of the milestone, and began to think,
for the first time, where he had better go and try to live.

The stone by which he was seated, bore, in large characters, an
intimation that it was just seventy miles from that spot to London. The
name awakened a new train of ideas in the boy's mind.

London!--that great place!--nobody--not even Mr. Bumble--could ever
find him there!  He had often heard the old men in the workhouse, too,
say that no lad of spirit need want in London; and that there were ways
of living in that vast city, which those who had been bred up in
country parts had no idea of.  It was the very place for a homeless
boy, who must die in the streets unless some one helped him. As these
things passed through his thoughts, he jumped upon his feet, and again
walked forward.

He had diminished the distance between himself and London by full four
miles more, before he recollected how much he must undergo ere he could
hope to reach his place of destination. As this consideration forced
itself upon him, he slackened his pace a little, and meditated upon his
means of getting there.  He had a crust of bread, a coarse shirt, and
two pairs of stockings, in his bundle.  He had a penny too--a gift of
Sowerberry's after some funeral in which he had acquitted himself more
than ordinarily well--in his pocket. 'A clean shirt,' thought Oliver,
'is a very comfortable thing; and so are two pairs of darned stockings;
and so is a penny; but they are small helps to a sixty-five miles' walk
in winter time.'  But Oliver's thoughts, like those of most other
people, although they were extremely ready and active to point out his
difficulties, were wholly at a loss to suggest any feasible mode of
surmounting them; so, after a good deal of thinking to no particular
purpose, he changed his little bundle over to the other shoulder, and
trudged on.

Oliver walked twenty miles that day; and all that time tasted nothing
but the crust of dry bread, and a few draughts of water, which he
begged at the cottage-doors by the road-side.  When the night came, he
turned into a meadow; and, creeping close under a hay-rick, determined
to lie there, till morning.  He felt frightened at first, for the wind
moaned dismally over the empty fields: and he was cold and hungry, and
more alone than he had ever felt before.  Being very tired with his
walk, however, he soon fell asleep and forgot his troubles.

He felt cold and stiff, when he got up next morning, and so hungry that
he was obliged to exchange the penny for a small loaf, in the very
first village through which he passed.  He had walked no more than
twelve miles, when night closed in again. His feet were sore, and his
legs so weak that they trembled beneath him.  Another night passed in
the bleak damp air, made him worse; when he set forward on his journey
next morning he could hardly crawl along.

He waited at the bottom of a steep hill till a stage-coach came up, and
then begged of the outside passengers; but there were very few who took
any notice of him: and even those told him to wait till they got to the
top of the hill, and then let them see how far he could run for a
halfpenny.  Poor Oliver tried to keep up with the coach a little way,
but was unable to do it, by reason of his fatigue and sore feet.  When
the outsides saw this, they put their halfpence back into their pockets
again, declaring that he was an idle young dog, and didn't deserve
anything; and the coach rattled away and left only a cloud of dust
behind.

In some villages, large painted boards were fixed up: warning all
persons who begged within the district, that they would be sent to
jail.  This frightened Oliver very much, and made him glad to get out
of those villages with all possible expedition.  In others, he would
stand about the inn-yards, and look mournfully at every one who passed:
a proceeding which generally terminated in the landlady's ordering one
of the post-boys who were lounging about, to drive that strange boy out
of the place, for she was sure he had come to steal something.  If he
begged at a farmer's house, ten to one but they threatened to set the
dog on him; and when he showed his nose in a shop, they talked about
the beadle--which brought Oliver's heart into his mouth,--very often
the only thing he had there, for many hours together.

In fact, if it had not been for a good-hearted turnpike-man, and a
benevolent old lady, Oliver's troubles would have been shortened by the
very same process which had put an end to his mother's; in other words,
he would most assuredly have fallen dead upon the king's highway.  But
the turnpike-man gave him a meal of bread and cheese; and the old lady,
who had a shipwrecked grandson wandering barefoot in some distant part
of the earth, took pity upon the poor orphan, and gave him what little
she could afford--and more--with such kind and gentle words, and such
tears of sympathy and compassion, that they sank deeper into Oliver's
soul, than all the sufferings he had ever undergone.

Early on the seventh morning after he had left his native place, Oliver
limped slowly into the little town of Barnet. The window-shutters were
closed; the street was empty; not a soul had awakened to the business
of the day.  The sun was rising in all its splendid beauty; but the
light only served to show the boy his own lonesomeness and desolation,
as he sat, with bleeding feet and covered with dust, upon a door-step.

By degrees, the shutters were opened; the window-blinds were drawn up;
and people began passing to and fro.  Some few stopped to gaze at
Oliver for a moment or two, or turned round to stare at him as they
hurried by; but none relieved him, or troubled themselves to inquire
how he came there. He had no heart to beg. And there he sat.

He had been crouching on the step for some time: wondering at the great
number of public-houses (every other house in Barnet was a tavern,
large or small), gazing listlessly at the coaches as they passed
through, and thinking how strange it seemed that they could do, with
ease, in a few hours, what it had taken him a whole week of courage and
determination beyond his years to accomplish: when he was roused by
observing that a boy, who had passed him carelessly some minutes
before, had returned, and was now surveying him most earnestly from the
opposite side of the way.  He took little heed of this at first; but
the boy remained in the same attitude of close observation so long,
that Oliver raised his head, and returned his steady look.  Upon this,
the boy crossed over; and walking close up to Oliver, said,

'Hullo, my covey!  What's the row?'

The boy who addressed this inquiry to the young wayfarer, was about his
own age: but one of the queerest looking boys that Oliver had even
seen.  He was a snub-nosed, flat-browed, common-faced boy enough; and
as dirty a juvenile as one would wish to see; but he had about him all
the airs and manners of a man.  He was short of his age: with rather
bow-legs, and little, sharp, ugly eyes.  His hat was stuck on the top
of his head so lightly, that it threatened to fall off every
moment--and would have done so, very often, if the wearer had not had a
knack of every now and then giving his head a sudden twitch, which
brought it back to its old place again.  He wore a man's coat, which
reached nearly to his heels.  He had turned the cuffs back, half-way up
his arm, to get his hands out of the sleeves: apparently with the
ultimate view of thrusting them into the pockets of his corduroy
trousers; for there he kept them.  He was, altogether, as roystering
and swaggering a young gentleman as ever stood four feet six, or
something less, in the bluchers.

'Hullo, my covey!  What's the row?' said this strange young gentleman
to Oliver.

'I am very hungry and tired,' replied Oliver: the tears standing in his
eyes as he spoke. 'I have walked a long way.  I have been walking these
seven days.'

'Walking for sivin days!' said the young gentleman.  'Oh, I see. Beak's
order, eh?  But,' he added, noticing Oliver's look of surprise, 'I
suppose you don't know what a beak is, my flash com-pan-i-on.'

Oliver mildly replied, that he had always heard a bird's mouth
described by the term in question.

'My eyes, how green!' exclaimed the young gentleman. 'Why, a beak's a
madgst'rate; and when you walk by a beak's order, it's not straight
forerd, but always agoing up, and niver a coming down agin.  Was you
never on the mill?'

'What mill?' inquired Oliver.

'What mill!  Why, _the_ mill--the mill as takes up so little room that
it'll work inside a Stone Jug; and always goes better when the wind's
low with people, than when it's high; acos then they can't get workmen.
But come,' said the young gentleman; 'you want grub, and you shall have
it.  I'm at low-water-mark myself--only one bob and a magpie; but, as
far as it goes, I'll fork out and stump.  Up with you on your pins.
There!  Now then! 'Morrice!'

Assisting Oliver to rise, the young gentleman took him to an adjacent
chandler's shop, where he purchased a sufficiency of ready-dressed ham
and a half-quartern loaf, or, as he himself expressed it, 'a fourpenny
bran!' the ham being kept clean and preserved from dust, by the
ingenious expedient of making a hole in the loaf by pulling out a
portion of the crumb, and stuffing it therein.  Taking the bread under
his arm, the young gentlman turned into a small public-house, and led
the way to a tap-room in the rear of the premises. Here, a pot of beer
was brought in, by direction of the mysterious youth; and Oliver,
falling to, at his new friend's bidding, made a long and hearty meal,
during the progress of which the strange boy eyed him from time to time
with great attention.

'Going to London?' said the strange boy, when Oliver had at length
concluded.

'Yes.'

'Got any lodgings?'

'No.'

'Money?'

'No.'

The strange boy whistled; and put his arms into his pockets, as far as
the big coat-sleeves would let them go.

'Do you live in London?' inquired Oliver.

'Yes. I do, when I'm at home,' replied the boy. 'I suppose you want
some place to sleep in to-night, don't you?'

'I do, indeed,' answered Oliver. 'I have not slept under a roof since I
left the country.'

'Don't fret your eyelids on that score,' said the young gentleman.
'I've got to be in London to-night; and I know a 'spectable old
gentleman as lives there, wot'll give you lodgings for nothink, and
never ask for the change--that is, if any genelman he knows interduces
you. And don't he know me?  Oh, no! Not in the least!  By no means.
Certainly not!'

The young gentleman smiled, as if to intimate that the latter fragments
of discourse were playfully ironical; and finished the beer as he did
so.

This unexpected offer of shelter was too tempting to be resisted;
especially as it was immediately followed up, by the assurance that the
old gentleman referred to, would doubtless provide Oliver with a
comfortable place, without loss of time.  This led to a more friendly
and confidential dialogue; from which Oliver discovered that his
friend's name was Jack Dawkins, and that he was a peculiar pet and
protege of the elderly gentleman before mentioned.

Mr. Dawkin's appearance did not say a vast deal in favour of the
comforts which his patron's interest obtained for those whom he took
under his protection; but, as he had a rather flightly and dissolute
mode of conversing, and furthermore avowed that among his intimate
friends he was better known by the sobriquet of 'The Artful Dodger,'
Oliver concluded that, being of a dissipated and careless turn, the
moral precepts of his benefactor had hitherto been thrown away upon
him.  Under this impression, he secretly resolved to cultivate the good
opinion of the old gentleman as quickly as possible; and, if he found
the Dodger incorrigible, as he more than half suspected he should, to
decline the honour of his farther acquaintance.

As John Dawkins objected to their entering London before nightfall, it
was nearly eleven o'clock when they reached the turnpike at Islington.
They crossed from the Angel into St. John's Road; struck down the small
street which terminates at Sadler's Wells Theatre; through Exmouth
Street and Coppice Row; down the little court by the side of the
workhouse; across the classic ground which once bore the name of
Hockley-in-the-Hole; thence into Little Saffron Hill; and so into
Saffron Hill the Great: along which the Dodger scudded at a rapid pace,
directing Oliver to follow close at his heels.

Although Oliver had enough to occupy his attention in keeping sight of
his leader, he could not help bestowing a few hasty glances on either
side of the way, as he passed along.  A dirtier or more wretched place
he had never seen.  The street was very narrow and muddy, and the air
was impregnated with filthy odours.

There were a good many small shops; but the only stock in trade
appeared to be heaps of children, who, even at that time of night, were
crawling in and out at the doors, or screaming from the inside.  The
sole places that seemed to prosper amid the general blight of the
place, were the public-houses; and in them, the lowest orders of Irish
were wrangling with might and main. Covered ways and yards, which here
and there diverged from the main street, disclosed little knots of
houses, where drunken men and women were positively wallowing in filth;
and from several of the door-ways, great ill-looking fellows were
cautiously emerging, bound, to all appearance, on no very well-disposed
or harmless errands.

Oliver was just considering whether he hadn't better run away, when
they reached the bottom of the hill.  His conductor, catching him by
the arm, pushed open the door of a house near Field Lane; and drawing
him into the passage, closed it behind them.

'Now, then!' cried a voice from below, in reply to a whistle from the
Dodger.

'Plummy and slam!' was the reply.

This seemed to be some watchword or signal that all was right; for the
light of a feeble candle gleamed on the wall at the remote end of the
passage; and a man's face peeped out, from where a balustrade of the
old kitchen staircase had been broken away.

'There's two on you,' said the man, thrusting the candle farther out,
and shielding his eyes with his hand.  'Who's the t'other one?'

'A new pal,' replied Jack Dawkins, pulling Oliver forward.

'Where did he come from?'

'Greenland. Is Fagin upstairs?'

'Yes, he's a sortin' the wipes.  Up with you!'  The candle was drawn
back, and the face disappeared.

Oliver, groping his way with one hand, and having the other firmly
grasped by his companion, ascended with much difficulty the dark and
broken stairs: which his conductor mounted with an ease and expedition
that showed he was well acquainted with them.

He threw open the door of a back-room, and drew Oliver in after him.

The walls and ceiling of the room were perfectly black with age and
dirt.  There was a deal table before the fire: upon which were a
candle, stuck in a ginger-beer bottle, two or three pewter pots, a loaf
and butter, and a plate.  In a frying-pan, which was on the fire, and
which was secured to the mantelshelf by a string, some sausages were
cooking; and standing over them, with a toasting-fork in his hand, was
a very old shrivelled Jew, whose villainous-looking and repulsive face
was obscured by a quantity of matted red hair. He was dressed in a
greasy flannel gown, with his throat bare; and seemed to be dividing
his attention between the frying-pan and the clothes-horse, over which
a great number of silk handkerchiefs were hanging.  Several rough beds
made of old sacks, were huddled side by side on the floor. Seated round
the table were four or five boys, none older than the Dodger, smoking
long clay pipes, and drinking spirits with the air of middle-aged men.
These all crowded about their associate as he whispered a few words to
the Jew; and then turned round and grinned at Oliver.  So did the Jew
himself, toasting-fork in hand.

'This is him, Fagin,' said Jack Dawkins;'my friend Oliver Twist.'

The Jew grinned; and, making a low obeisance to Oliver, took him by the
hand, and hoped he should have the honour of his intimate acquaintance.
Upon this, the young gentleman with the pipes came round him, and shook
both his hands very hard--especially the one in which he held his
little bundle.  One young gentleman was very anxious to hang up his cap
for him; and another was so obliging as to put his hands in his
pockets, in order that, as he was very tired, he might not have the
trouble of emptying them, himself, when he went to bed.  These
civilities would probably be extended much farther, but for a liberal
exercise of the Jew's toasting-fork on the heads and shoulders of the
affectionate youths who offered them.

'We are very glad to see you, Oliver, very,' said the Jew. 'Dodger,
take off the sausages; and draw a tub near the fire for Oliver.  Ah,
you're a-staring at the pocket-handkerchiefs! eh, my dear. There are a
good many of 'em, ain't there? We've just looked 'em out, ready for the
wash; that's all, Oliver; that's all. Ha! ha! ha!'

The latter part of this speech, was hailed by a boisterous shout from
all the hopeful pupils of the merry old gentleman. In the midst of
which they went to supper.

Oliver ate his share, and the Jew then mixed him a glass of hot
gin-and-water: telling him he must drink it off directly, because
another gentleman wanted the tumbler. Oliver did as he was desired.
Immediately afterwards he felt himself gently lifted on to one of the
sacks; and then he sunk into a deep sleep.



CHAPTER IX

CONTAINING FURTHER PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE PLEASANT OLD GENTLEMAN,
AND HIS HOPEFUL PUPILS

It was late next morning when Oliver awoke, from a sound, long sleep.
There was no other person in the room but the old Jew, who was boiling
some coffee in a saucepan for breakfast, and whistling softly to
himself as he stirred it round and round, with an iron spoon. He would
stop every now and then to listen when there was the least noise below:
and when he had satisfied himself, he would go on whistling and
stirring again, as before.

Although Oliver had roused himself from sleep, he was not thoroughly
awake. There is a drowsy state, between sleeping and waking, when you
dream more in five minutes with your eyes half open, and yourself half
conscious of everything that is passing around you, than you would in
five nights with your eyes fast closed, and your senses wrapt in
perfect unconsciousness. At such time, a mortal knows just enough of
what his mind is doing, to form some glimmering conception of its
mighty powers, its bounding from earth and spurning time and space,
when freed from the restraint of its corporeal associate.

Oliver was precisely in this condition. He saw the Jew with his
half-closed eyes; heard his low whistling; and recognised the sound of
the spoon grating against the saucepan's sides: and yet the self-same
senses were mentally engaged, at the same time, in busy action with
almost everybody he had ever known.

When the coffee was done, the Jew drew the saucepan to the hob.
Standing, then in an irresolute attitude for a few minutes, as if he
did not well know how to employ himself, he turned round and looked at
Oliver, and called him by his name. He did not answer, and was to all
appearances asleep.

After satisfying himself upon this head, the Jew stepped gently to the
door: which he fastened. He then drew forth: as it seemed to Oliver,
from some trap in the floor: a small box, which he placed carefully on
the table. His eyes glistened as he raised the lid, and looked in.
Dragging an old chair to the table, he sat down; and took from it a
magnificent gold watch, sparkling with jewels.

'Aha!' said the Jew, shrugging up his shoulders, and distorting every
feature with a hideous grin. 'Clever dogs! Clever dogs! Staunch to the
last! Never told the old parson where they were. Never poached upon old
Fagin! And why should they? It wouldn't have loosened the knot, or kept
the drop up, a minute longer. No, no, no! Fine fellows! Fine fellows!'

With these, and other muttered reflections of the like nature, the Jew
once more deposited the watch in its place of safety. At least half a
dozen more were severally drawn forth from the same box, and surveyed
with equal pleasure; besides rings, brooches, bracelets, and other
articles of jewellery, of such magnificent materials, and costly
workmanship, that Oliver had no idea, even of their names.

Having replaced these trinkets, the Jew took out another: so small that
it lay in the palm of his hand. There seemed to be some very minute
inscription on it; for the Jew laid it flat upon the table, and shading
it with his hand, pored over it, long and earnestly. At length he put
it down, as if despairing of success; and, leaning back in his chair,
muttered:

'What a fine thing capital punishment is! Dead men never repent; dead
men never bring awkward stories to light. Ah, it's a fine thing for the
trade! Five of 'em strung up in a row, and none left to play booty, or
turn white-livered!'

As the Jew uttered these words, his bright dark eyes, which had been
staring vacantly before him, fell on Oliver's face; the boy's eyes were
fixed on his in mute curiousity; and although the recognition was only
for an instant--for the briefest space of time that can possibly be
conceived--it was enough to show the old man that he had been observed.

He closed the lid of the box with a loud crash; and, laying his hand on
a bread knife which was on the table, started furiously up. He trembled
very much though; for, even in his terror, Oliver could see that the
knife quivered in the air.

'What's that?' said the Jew. 'What do you watch me for? Why are you
awake? What have you seen? Speak out, boy! Quick--quick! for your life.

'I wasn't able to sleep any longer, sir,' replied Oliver, meekly. 'I am
very sorry if I have disturbed you, sir.'

'You were not awake an hour ago?' said the Jew, scowling fiercely on
the boy.

'No! No, indeed!' replied Oliver.

'Are you sure?' cried the Jew: with a still fiercer look than before:
and a threatening attitude.

'Upon my word I was not, sir,' replied Oliver, earnestly. 'I was not,
indeed, sir.'

'Tush, tush, my dear!' said the Jew, abruptly resuming his old manner,
and playing with the knife a little, before he laid it down; as if to
induce the belief that he had caught it up, in mere sport. 'Of course I
know that, my dear. I only tried to frighten you. You're a brave boy.
Ha! ha! you're a brave boy, Oliver.' The Jew rubbed his hands with a
chuckle, but glanced uneasily at the box, notwithstanding.

'Did you see any of these pretty things, my dear?' said the Jew, laying
his hand upon it after a short pause.

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Ah!' said the Jew, turning rather pale. 'They--they're mine, Oliver;
my little property. All I have to live upon, in my old age. The folks
call me a miser, my dear. Only a miser; that's all.'

Oliver thought the old gentleman must be a decided miser to live in
such a dirty place, with so many watches; but, thinking that perhaps
his fondness for the Dodger and the other boys, cost him a good deal of
money, he only cast a deferential look at the Jew, and asked if he
might get up.

'Certainly, my dear, certainly,' replied the old gentleman. 'Stay.
There's a pitcher of water in the corner by the door. Bring it here;
and I'll give you a basin to wash in, my dear.'

Oliver got up; walked across the room; and stooped for an instant to
raise the pitcher.  When he turned his head, the box was gone.

He had scarcely washed himself, and made everything tidy, by emptying
the basin out of the window, agreeably to the Jew's directions, when
the Dodger returned: accompanied by a very sprightly young friend, whom
Oliver had seen smoking on the previous night, and who was now formally
introduced to him as Charley Bates. The four sat down, to breakfast, on
the coffee, and some hot rolls and ham which the Dodger had brought
home in the crown of his hat.

'Well,' said the Jew, glancing slyly at Oliver, and addressing himself
to the Dodger, 'I hope you've been at work this morning, my dears?'

'Hard,' replied the Dodger.

'As nails,' added Charley Bates.

'Good boys, good boys!' said the Jew. 'What have you got, Dodger?'

'A couple of pocket-books,' replied that young gentlman.

'Lined?' inquired the Jew, with eagerness.

'Pretty well,' replied the Dodger, producing two pocket-books; one
green, and the other red.

'Not so heavy as they might be,' said the Jew, after looking at the
insides carefully; 'but very neat and nicely made.  Ingenious workman,
ain't he, Oliver?'

'Very indeed, sir,' said Oliver. At which Mr. Charles Bates laughed
uproariously; very much to the amazement of Oliver, who saw nothing to
laugh at, in anything that had passed.

'And what have you got, my dear?' said Fagin to Charley Bates.

'Wipes,' replied Master Bates; at the same time producing four
pocket-handkerchiefs.

'Well,' said the Jew, inspecting them closely; 'they're very good ones,
very. You haven't marked them well, though, Charley; so the marks shall
be picked out with a needle, and we'll teach Oliver how to do it. Shall
us, Oliver, eh? Ha! ha! ha!'

'If you please, sir,' said Oliver.

'You'd like to be able to make pocket-handkerchiefs as easy as Charley
Bates, wouldn't you, my dear?' said the Jew.

'Very much, indeed, if you'll teach me, sir,' replied Oliver.

Master Bates saw something so exquisitely ludicrous in this reply, that
he burst into another laugh; which laugh, meeting the coffee he was
drinking, and carrying it down some wrong channel, very nearly
terminated in his premature suffocation.

'He is so jolly green!' said Charley when he recovered, as an apology
to the company for his unpolite behaviour.

The Dodger said nothing, but he smoothed Oliver's hair over his eyes,
and said he'd know better, by and by; upon which the old gentleman,
observing Oliver's colour mounting, changed the subject by asking
whether there had been much of a crowd at the execution that morning?
This made him wonder more and more; for it was plain from the replies
of the two boys that they had both been there; and Oliver naturally
wondered how they could possibly have found time to be so very
industrious.

When the breakfast was cleared away; the merry old gentlman and the two
boys played at a very curious and uncommon game, which was performed in
this way. The merry old gentleman, placing a snuff-box in one pocket of
his trousers, a note-case in the other, and a watch in his waistcoat
pocket, with a guard-chain round his neck, and sticking a mock diamond
pin in his shirt: buttoned his coat tight round him, and putting his
spectacle-case and handkerchief in his pockets, trotted up and down the
room with a stick, in imitation of the manner in which old gentlemen
walk about the streets any hour in the day.  Sometimes he stopped at
the fire-place, and sometimes at the door, making believe that he was
staring with all his might into shop-windows.  At such times, he would
look constantly round him, for fear of thieves, and would keep slapping
all his pockets in turn, to see that he hadn't lost anything, in such a
very funny and natural manner, that Oliver laughed till the tears ran
down his face.  All this time, the two boys followed him closely about:
getting out of his sight, so nimbly, every time he turned round, that
it was impossible to follow their motions. At last, the Dodger trod
upon his toes, or ran upon his boot accidently, while Charley Bates
stumbled up against him behind; and in that one moment they took from
him, with the most extraordinary rapidity, snuff-box, note-case,
watch-guard, chain, shirt-pin, pocket-handkerchief, even the
spectacle-case.  If the old gentlman felt a hand in any one of his
pockets, he cried out where it was; and then the game began all over
again.

When this game had been played a great many times, a couple of young
ladies called to see the young gentleman; one of whom was named Bet,
and the other Nancy.  They wore a good deal of hair, not very neatly
turned up behind, and were rather untidy about the shoes and stockings.
They were not exactly pretty, perhaps; but they had a great deal of
colour in their faces, and looked quite stout and hearty.  Being
remarkably free and agreeable in their manners, Oliver thought them
very nice girls indeed.  As there is no doubt they were.

The visitors stopped a long time. Spirits were produced, in consequence
of one of the young ladies complaining of a coldness in her inside; and
the conversation took a very convivial and improving turn. At length,
Charley Bates expressed his opinion that it was time to pad the hoof.
This, it occurred to Oliver, must be French for going out; for directly
afterwards, the Dodger, and Charley, and the two young ladies, went
away together, having been kindly furnished by the amiable old Jew with
money to spend.

'There, my dear,' said Fagin. 'That's a pleasant life, isn't it? They
have gone out for the day.'

'Have they done work, sir?' inquired Oliver.

'Yes,' said the Jew; 'that is, unless they should unexpectedly come
across any, when they are out; and they won't neglect it, if they do,
my dear, depend upon it.  Make 'em your models, my dear. Make 'em your
models,' tapping the fire-shovel on the hearth to add force to his
words; 'do everything they bid you, and take their advice in all
matters--especially the Dodger's, my dear. He'll be a great man
himself, and will make you one too, if you take pattern by him.--Is my
handkerchief hanging out of my pocket, my dear?' said the Jew, stopping
short.

'Yes, sir,' said Oliver.

'See if you can take it out, without my feeling it; as you saw them do,
when we were at play this morning.'

Oliver held up the bottom of the pocket with one hand, as he had seen
the Dodger hold it, and drew the handkerchief lightly out of it with
the other.

'Is it gone?' cried the Jew.

'Here it is, sir,' said Oliver, showing it in his hand.

'You're a clever boy, my dear,' said the playful old gentleman, patting
Oliver on the head approvingly. 'I never saw a sharper lad. Here's a
shilling for you. If you go on, in this way, you'll be the greatest man
of the time. And now come here, and I'll show you how to take the marks
out of the handkerchiefs.'

Oliver wondered what picking the old gentleman's pocket in play, had to
do with his chances of being a great man.  But, thinking that the Jew,
being so much his senior, must know best, he followed him quietly to
the table, and was soon deeply involved in his new study.



CHAPTER X

OLIVER BECOMES BETTER ACQUAINTED WITH THE CHARACTERS OF HIS NEW
ASSOCIATES; AND PURCHASES EXPERIENCE AT A HIGH PRICE. BEING A SHORT,
BUT VERY IMPORTANT CHAPTER, IN THIS HISTORY

For many days, Oliver remained in the Jew's room, picking the marks out
of the pocket-handkerchief, (of which a great number were brought
home,) and sometimes taking part in the game already described: which
the two boys and the Jew played, regularly, every morning. At length,
he began to languish for fresh air, and took many occasions of
earnestly entreating the old gentleman to allow him to go out to work
with his two companions.

Oliver was rendered the more anxious to be actively employed, by what
he had seen of the stern morality of the old gentleman's character.
Whenever the Dodger or Charley Bates came home at night, empty-handed,
he would expatiate with great vehemence on the misery of idle and lazy
habits; and would enforce upon them the necessity of an active life, by
sending them supperless to bed. On one occasion, indeed, he even went
so far as to knock them both down a flight of stairs; but this was
carrying out his virtuous precepts to an unusual extent.

At length, one morning, Oliver obtained the permission he had so
eagerly sought. There had been no handkerchiefs to work upon, for two
or three days, and the dinners had been rather meagre. Perhaps these
were reasons for the old gentleman's giving his assent; but, whether
they were or no, he told Oliver he might go, and placed him under the
joint guardianship of Charley Bates, and his friend the Dodger.

The three boys sallied out; the Dodger with his coat-sleeves tucked up,
and his hat cocked, as usual; Master Bates sauntering along with his
hands in his pockets; and Oliver between them, wondering where they
were going, and what branch of manufacture he would be instructed in,
first.

The pace at which they went, was such a very lazy, ill-looking saunter,
that Oliver soon began to think his companions were going to deceive
the old gentleman, by not going to work at all. The Dodger had a
vicious propensity, too, of pulling the caps from the heads of small
boys and tossing them down areas; while Charley Bates exhibited some
very loose notions concerning the rights of property, by pilfering
divers apples and onions from the stalls at the kennel sides, and
thrusting them into pockets which were so surprisingly capacious, that
they seemed to undermine his whole suit of clothes in every direction.
These things looked so bad, that Oliver was on the point of declaring
his intention of seeking his way back, in the best way he could; when
his thoughts were suddenly directed into another channel, by a very
mysterious change of behaviour on the part of the Dodger.

They were just emerging from a narrow court not far from the open
square in Clerkenwell, which is yet called, by some strange perversion
of terms, 'The Green': when the Dodger made a sudden stop; and, laying
his finger on his lip, drew his companions back again, with the
greatest caution and circumspection.

'What's the matter?' demanded Oliver.

'Hush!' replied the Dodger. 'Do you see that old cove at the
book-stall?'

'The old gentleman over the way?' said Oliver. 'Yes, I see him.'

'He'll do,' said the Dodger.

'A prime plant,' observed Master Charley Bates.

Oliver looked from one to the other, with the greatest surprise; but he
was not permitted to make any inquiries; for the two boys walked
stealthily across the road, and slunk close behind the old gentleman
towards whom his attention had been directed. Oliver walked a few paces
after them; and, not knowing whether to advance or retire, stood
looking on in silent amazement.

The old gentleman was a very respectable-looking personage, with a
powdered head and gold spectacles. He was dressed in a bottle-green
coat with a black velvet collar; wore white trousers; and carried a
smart bamboo cane under his arm. He had taken up a book from the stall,
and there he stood, reading away, as hard as if he were in his
elbow-chair, in his own study. It is very possible that he fancied
himself there, indeed; for it was plain, from his abstraction, that he
saw not the book-stall, nor the street, nor the boys, nor, in short,
anything but the book itself: which he was reading straight through:
turning over the leaf when he got to the bottom of a page, beginning at
the top line of the next one, and going regularly on, with the greatest
interest and eagerness.

What was Oliver's horror and alarm as he stood a few paces off, looking
on with his eyelids as wide open as they would possibly go, to see the
Dodger plunge his hand into the old gentleman's pocket, and draw from
thence a handkerchief! To see him hand the same to Charley Bates; and
finally to behold them, both running away round the corner at full
speed!

In an instant the whole mystery of the hankerchiefs, and the watches,
and the jewels, and the Jew, rushed upon the boy's mind.

He stood, for a moment, with the blood so tingling through all his
veins from terror, that he felt as if he were in a burning fire; then,
confused and frightened, he took to his heels; and, not knowing what he
did, made off as fast as he could lay his feet to the ground.

This was all done in a minute's space. In the very instant when Oliver
began to run, the old gentleman, putting his hand to his pocket, and
missing his handkerchief, turned sharp round. Seeing the boy scudding
away at such a rapid pace, he very naturally concluded him to be the
depredator; and shouting 'Stop thief!' with all his might, made off
after him, book in hand.

But the old gentleman was not the only person who raised the
hue-and-cry. The Dodger and Master Bates, unwilling to attract public
attention by running down the open street, had merely retired into the
very first doorway round the corner. They no sooner heard the cry, and
saw Oliver running, than, guessing exactly how the matter stood, they
issued forth with great promptitude; and, shouting 'Stop thief!' too,
joined in the pursuit like good citizens.

Although Oliver had been brought up by philosophers, he was not
theoretically acquainted with the beautiful axiom that
self-preservation is the first law of nature. If he had been, perhaps
he would have been prepared for this. Not being prepared, however, it
alarmed him the more; so away he went like the wind, with the old
gentleman and the two boys roaring and shouting behind him.

'Stop thief! Stop thief!' There is a magic in the sound. The tradesman
leaves his counter, and the car-man his waggon; the butcher throws down
his tray; the baker his basket; the milkman his pail; the errand-boy
his parcels; the school-boy his marbles; the paviour his pickaxe; the
child his battledore. Away they run, pell-mell, helter-skelter,
slap-dash: tearing, yelling, screaming, knocking down the passengers as
they turn the corners, rousing up the dogs, and astonishing the fowls:
and streets, squares, and courts, re-echo with the sound.

'Stop thief! Stop thief!' The cry is taken up by a hundred voices, and
the crowd accumulate at every turning. Away they fly, splashing through
the mud, and rattling along the pavements: up go the windows, out run
the people, onward bear the mob, a whole audience desert Punch in the
very thickest of the plot, and, joining the rushing throng, swell the
shout, and lend fresh vigour to the cry, 'Stop thief! Stop thief!'

'Stop thief! Stop thief!' There is a passion FOR _hunting_ _something_
deeply implanted in the human breast.  One wretched breathless child,
panting with exhaustion; terror in his looks; agony in his eyes; large
drops of perspiration streaming down his face; strains every nerve to
make head upon his pursuers; and as they follow on his track, and gain
upon him every instant, they hail his decreasing strength with joy.
'Stop thief!'  Ay, stop him for God's sake, were it only in mercy!

Stopped at last!  A clever blow.  He is down upon the pavement; and the
crowd eagerly gather round him:  each new comer, jostling and
struggling with the others to catch a glimpse.  'Stand aside!'  'Give
him a little air!'  'Nonsense! he don't deserve it.'  'Where's the
gentleman?'  'Here his is, coming down the street.'  'Make room there
for the gentleman!' 'Is this the boy, sir!'  'Yes.'

Oliver lay, covered with mud and dust, and bleeding from the mouth,
looking wildly round upon the heap of faces that surrounded him, when
the old gentleman was officiously dragged and pushed into the circle by
the foremost of the pursuers.

'Yes,' said the gentleman, 'I am afraid it is the boy.'

'Afraid!' murmured the crowd.  'That's a good 'un!'

'Poor fellow!' said the gentleman, 'he has hurt himself.'

'_I_ did that, sir,' said a great lubberly fellow, stepping forward;
'and preciously I cut my knuckle agin' his mouth.  I stopped him, sir.'

The fellow touched his hat with a grin, expecting something for his
pains; but, the old gentleman, eyeing him with an expression of
dislike, look anxiously round, as if he contemplated running away
himself:  which it is very possible he might have attempted to do, and
thus have afforded another chase, had not a police officer (who is
generally the last person to arrive in such cases) at that moment made
his way through the crowd, and seized Oliver by the collar.

'Come, get up,' said the man, roughly.

'It wasn't me indeed, sir.  Indeed, indeed, it was two other boys,'
said Oliver, clasping his hands passionately, and looking round.  'They
are here somewhere.'

'Oh no, they ain't,' said the officer.  He meant this to be ironical,
but it was true besides; for the Dodger and Charley Bates had filed off
down the first convenient court they came to.

'Come, get up!'

'Don't hurt him,' said the old gentleman, compassionately.

'Oh no, I won't hurt him,' replied the officer, tearing his jacket half
off his back, in proof thereof.  'Come, I know you; it won't do.  Will
you stand upon your legs, you young devil?'

Oliver, who could hardly stand, made a shift to raise himself on his
feet, and was at once lugged along the streets by the jacket-collar, at
a rapid pace.  The gentleman walked on with them by the officer's side;
and as many of the crowd as could achieve the feat, got a little ahead,
and stared back at Oliver from time to time.  The boys shouted in
triumph; and on they went.



CHAPTER XI

TREATS OF MR. FANG THE POLICE MAGISTRATE; AND FURNISHES A SLIGHT
SPECIMEN OF HIS MODE OF ADMINISTERING JUSTICE

The offence had been committed within the district, and indeed in the
immediate neighborhood of, a very notorious metropolitan police office.
The crowd had only the satisfaction of accompanying Oliver through two
or three streets, and down a place called Mutton Hill, when he was led
beneath a low archway, and up a dirty court, into this dispensary of
summary justice, by the back way.  It was a small paved yard into which
they turned; and here they encountered a stout man with a bunch of
whiskers on his face, and a bunch of keys in his hand.

'What's the matter now?' said the man carelessly.

'A young fogle-hunter,' replied the man who had Oliver in charge.

'Are you the party that's been robbed, sir?' inquired the man with the
keys.

'Yes, I am,' replied the old gentleman; 'but I am not sure that this
boy actually took the handkerchief.  I--I would rather not press the
case.'

'Must go before the magistrate now, sir,' replied the man. 'His worship
will be disengaged in half a minute.  Now, young gallows!'

This was an invitation for Oliver to enter through a door which he
unlocked as he spoke, and which led into a stone cell.  Here he was
searched; and nothing being found upon him, locked up.

This cell was in shape and size something like an area cellar, only not
so light.  It was most intolerably dirty; for it was Monday morning;
and it had been tenanted by six drunken people, who had been locked up,
elsewhere, since Saturday night.  But this is little.  In our
station-houses, men and women are every night confined on the most
trivial charges--the word is worth noting--in dungeons, compared with
which, those in Newgate, occupied by the most atrocious felons, tried,
found guilty, and under sentence of death, are palaces. Let any one who
doubts this, compare the two.

The old gentleman looked almost as rueful as Oliver when the key grated
in the lock.  He turned with a sigh to the book, which had been the
innocent cause of all this disturbance.

'There is something in that boy's face,' said the old gentleman to
himself as he walked slowly away, tapping his chin with the cover of
the book, in a thoughtful manner; 'something that touches and interests
me.  _Can_ he be innocent?  He looked like--Bye the bye,' exclaimed the
old gentleman, halting very abruptly, and staring up into the sky,
'Bless my soul!--where have I seen something like that look before?'

After musing for some minutes, the old gentleman walked, with the same
meditative face, into a back anteroom opening from the yard; and there,
retiring into a corner, called up before his mind's eye a vast
amphitheatre of faces over which a dusky curtain had hung for many
years.  'No,' said the old gentleman, shaking his head; 'it must be
imagination.'

He wandered over them again.  He had called them into view, and it was
not easy to replace the shroud that had so long concealed them.  There
were the faces of friends, and foes, and of many that had been almost
strangers peering intrusively from the crowd; there were the faces of
young and blooming girls that were now old women; there were faces that
the grave had changed and closed upon, but which the mind, superior to
its power, still dressed in their old freshness and beauty, calling
back the lustre of the eyes, the brightness of the smile, the beaming
of the soul through its mask of clay, and whispering of beauty beyond
the tomb, changed but to be heightened, and taken from earth only to be
set up as a light, to shed a soft and gentle glow upon the path to
Heaven.

But the old gentleman could recall no one countenance of which Oliver's
features bore a trace.  So, he heaved a sigh over the recollections he
awakened; and being, happily for himself, an absent old gentleman,
buried them again in the pages of the musty book.

He was roused by a touch on the shoulder, and a request from the man
with the keys to follow him into the office.  He closed his book
hastily; and was at once ushered into the imposing presence of the
renowned Mr. Fang.

The office was a front parlour, with a panelled wall.  Mr. Fang sat
behind a bar, at the upper end; and on one side the door was a sort of
wooden pen in which poor little Oliver was already deposited; trembling
very much at the awfulness of the scene.

Mr. Fang was a lean, long-backed, stiff-necked, middle-sized man, with
no great quantity of hair, and what he had, growing on the back and
sides of his head.  His face was stern, and much flushed.  If he were
really not in the habit of drinking rather more than was exactly good
for him, he might have brought action against his countenance for
libel, and have recovered heavy damages.

The old gentleman bowed respectfully; and advancing to the magistrate's
desk, said, suiting the action to the word, 'That is my name and
address, sir.'  He then withdrew a pace or two; and, with another
polite and gentlemanly inclination of the head, waited to be questioned.

Now, it so happened that Mr. Fang was at that moment perusing a leading
article in a newspaper of the morning, adverting to some recent
decision of his, and commending him, for the three hundred and fiftieth
time, to the special and particular notice of the Secretary of State
for the Home Department.  He was out of temper; and he looked up with
an angry scowl.

'Who are you?' said Mr. Fang.

The old gentleman pointed, with some surprise, to his card.

'Officer!' said Mr. Fang, tossing the card contemptuously away with the
newspaper.  'Who is this fellow?'

'My name, sir,' said the old gentleman, speaking _like_ a gentleman,
'my name, sir, is Brownlow.  Permit me to inquire the name of the
magistrate who offers a gratuitous and unprovoked insult to a
respectable person, under the protection of the bench.'  Saying this,
Mr. Brownlow looked around the office as if in search of some person
who would afford him the required information.

'Officer!' said Mr. Fang, throwing the paper on one side, 'what's this
fellow charged with?'

'He's not charged at all, your worship,' replied the officer. 'He
appears against this boy, your worship.'

His worship knew this perfectly well; but it was a good annoyance, and
a safe one.

'Appears against the boy, does he?' said Mr. Fang, surveying Mr.
Brownlow contemptuously from head to foot.  'Swear him!'

'Before I am sworn, I must beg to say one word,' said Mr. Brownlow;
'and that is, that I really never, without actual experience, could
have believed--'

'Hold your tongue, sir!' said Mr. Fang, peremptorily.

'I will not, sir!' replied the old gentleman.

'Hold your tongue this instant, or I'll have you turned out of the
office!' said Mr. Fang.  'You're an insolent impertinent fellow.  How
dare you bully a magistrate!'

'What!' exclaimed the old gentleman, reddening.

'Swear this person!' said Fang to the clerk.  'I'll not hear another
word.  Swear him.'

Mr. Brownlow's indignation was greatly roused; but reflecting perhaps,
that he might only injure the boy by giving vent to it, he suppressed
his feelings and submitted to be sworn at once.

'Now,' said Fang, 'what's the charge against this boy?  What have you
got to say, sir?'

'I was standing at a bookstall--' Mr. Brownlow began.

'Hold your tongue, sir,' said Mr. Fang.  'Policeman!  Where's the
policeman?  Here, swear this policeman.  Now, policeman, what is this?'

The policeman, with becoming humility, related how he had taken the
charge; how he had searched Oliver, and found nothing on his person;
and how that was all he knew about it.

'Are there any witnesses?' inquired Mr. Fang.

'None, your worship,' replied the policeman.

Mr. Fang sat silent for some minutes, and then, turning round to the
prosecutor, said in a towering passion.

'Do you mean to state what your complaint against this boy is, man, or
do you not?  You have been sworn.  Now, if you stand there, refusing to
give evidence, I'll punish you for disrespect to the bench; I will,
by--'

By what, or by whom, nobody knows, for the clerk and jailor coughed
very loud, just at the right moment; and the former dropped a heavy
book upon the floor, thus preventing the word from being
heard--accidently, of course.

With many interruptions, and repeated insults, Mr. Brownlow contrived
to state his case;  observing that, in the surprise of the moment, he
had run after the boy because he had saw him running away; and
expressing his hope that, if the magistrate should believe him,
although not actually the thief, to be connected with the thieves, he
would deal as leniently with him as justice would allow.

'He has been hurt already,' said the old gentleman in conclusion. 'And
I fear,' he added, with great energy, looking towards the bar, 'I
really fear that he is ill.'

'Oh! yes, I dare say!' said Mr. Fang, with a sneer.  'Come, none of
your tricks here, you young vagabond; they won't do. What's your name?'

Oliver tried to reply but his tongue failed him.  He was deadly pale;
and the whole place seemed turning round and round.

'What's your name, you hardened scoundrel?' demanded Mr. Fang.
'Officer, what's his name?'

This was addressed to a bluff old fellow, in a striped waistcoat, who
was standing by the bar.  He bent over Oliver, and repeated the
inquiry; but finding him really incapable of understanding the
question; and knowing that his not replying would only infuriate the
magistrate the more, and add to the severity of his sentence; he
hazarded a guess.

'He says his name's Tom White, your worship,' said the kind-hearted
thief-taker.

'Oh, he won't speak out, won't he?' said Fang.  'Very well, very well.
Where does he live?'

'Where he can, your worship,' replied the officer; again pretending to
receive Oliver's answer.

'Has he any parents?' inquired Mr. Fang.

'He says they died in his infancy, your worship,' replied the officer:
hazarding the usual reply.

At this point of the inquiry, Oliver raised his head; and, looking
round with imploring eyes, murmured a feeble prayer for a draught of
water.

'Stuff and nonsense!' said Mr. Fang:  'don't try to make a fool of me.'

'I think he really is ill, your worship,' remonstrated the officer.

'I know better,' said Mr. Fang.

'Take care of him, officer,' said the old gentleman, raising his hands
instinctively; 'he'll fall down.'

'Stand away, officer,' cried Fang;  'let him, if he likes.'

Oliver availed himself of the kind permission, and fell to the floor in
a fainting fit.  The men in the office looked at each other, but no one
dared to stir.

'I knew he was shamming,' said Fang, as if this were incontestable
proof of the fact.  'Let him lie there; he'll soon be tired of that.'

'How do you propose to deal with the case, sir?'  inquired the clerk in
a low voice.

'Summarily,' replied Mr. Fang.  'He stands committed for three
months--hard labour of course.  Clear the office.'

The door was opened for this purpose, and a couple of men were
preparing to carry the insensible boy to his cell; when an elderly man
of decent but poor appearance, clad in an old suit of black, rushed
hastily into the office, and advanced towards the bench.

'Stop, stop!  don't take him away!  For Heaven's sake stop a moment!'
cried the new comer, breathless with haste.

Although the presiding Genii in such an office as this, exercise a
summary and arbitrary power over the liberties, the good name, the
character, almost the lives, of Her Majesty's subjects, expecially of
the poorer class; and although, within such walls, enough fantastic
tricks are daily played to make the angels blind with weeping; they are
closed to the public, save through the medium of the daily
press.[Footnote:  Or were virtually, then.] Mr. Fang was consequently
not a little indignant to see an unbidden guest enter in such
irreverent disorder.

'What is this?  Who is this?  Turn this man out.  Clear the office!'
cried Mr. Fang.

'I _will_ speak,' cried the man; 'I will not be turned out.  I saw it
all.  I keep the book-stall.  I demand to be sworn. I will not be put
down.  Mr. Fang, you must hear me.  You must not refuse, sir.'

The man was right.  His manner was determined; and the matter was
growing rather too serious to be hushed up.

'Swear the man,' growled Mr. Fang, with a very ill grace. 'Now, man,
what have you got to say?'

'This,' said the man:  'I saw three boys:  two others and the prisoner
here:  loitering on the opposite side of the way, when this gentleman
was reading.  The robbery was committed by another boy.  I saw it done;
and I saw that this boy was perfectly amazed and stupified by it.'
Having by this time recovered a little breath, the worthy book-stall
keeper proceeded to relate, in a more coherent manner the exact
circumstances of the robbery.

'Why didn't you come here before?' said Fang, after a pause.

'I hadn't a soul to mind the shop,' replied the man.  'Everybody who
could have helped me, had joined in the pursuit.  I could get nobody
till five minutes ago; and I've run here all the way.'

'The prosecutor was reading, was he?' inquired Fang, after another
pause.

'Yes,' replied the man.  'The very book he has in his hand.'

'Oh, that book, eh?' said Fang.  'Is it paid for?'

'No, it is not,' replied the man, with a smile.

'Dear me, I forgot all about it!' exclaimed the absent old gentleman,
innocently.

'A nice person to prefer a charge against a poor boy!' said Fang, with
a comical effort to look humane.  'I consider, sir, that you have
obtained possession of that book, under very suspicious and
disreputable circumstances; and you may think yourself very fortunate
that the owner of the property declines to prosecute. Let this be a
lesson to you, my man, or the law will overtake you yet.  The boy is
discharged.  Clear the office!'

'D--n me!' cried the old gentleman, bursting out with the rage he had
kept down so long, 'd--n me!   I'll--'

'Clear the office!' said the magistrate.  'Officers, do you hear? Clear
the office!'

The mandate was obeyed; and the indignant Mr. Brownlow was conveyed
out, with the book in one hand, and the bamboo cane in the other:  in a
perfect phrenzy of rage and defiance.  He reached the yard; and his
passion vanished in a moment.  Little Oliver Twist lay on his back on
the pavement, with his shirt unbuttoned, and his temples bathed with
water; his face a deadly white; and a cold tremble convulsing his whole
frame.

'Poor boy, poor boy!' said Mr. Brownlow, bending over him. 'Call a
coach, somebody, pray.  Directly!'

A coach was obtained, and Oliver having been carefully laid on the
seat, the old gentleman got in and sat himself on the other.

'May I accompany you?' said the book-stall keeper, looking in.

'Bless me, yes, my dear sir,' said Mr. Brownlow quickly.  'I forgot
you.  Dear, dear!  I have this unhappy book still! Jump in.  Poor
fellow!  There's no time to lose.'

The book-stall keeper got into the coach; and away they drove.



CHAPTER XII

IN WHICH OLIVER IS TAKEN BETTER CARE OF THAN HE EVER WAS BEFORE. AND IN
WHICH THE NARRATIVE REVERTS TO THE MERRY OLD GENTLEMAN AND HIS YOUTHFUL
FRIENDS.

The coach rattled away, over nearly the same ground as that which
Oliver had traversed when he first entered London in company with the
Dodger; and, turning a different way when it reached the Angel at
Islington, stopped at length before a neat house, in a quiet shady
street near Pentonville.  Here, a bed was prepared, without loss of
time, in which Mr. Brownlow saw his young charge carefully and
comfortably deposited; and here, he was tended with a kindness and
solicitude that knew no bounds.

But, for many days, Oliver remained insensible to all the goodness of
his new friends.  The sun rose and sank, and rose and sank again, and
many times after that; and still the boy lay stretched on his uneasy
bed, dwindling away beneath the dry and wasting heat of fever.  The
worm does not work more surely on the dead body, than does this slow
creeping fire upon the living frame.

Weak, and thin, and pallid, he awoke at last from what seemed to have
been a long and troubled dream.  Feebly raising himself in the bed,
with his head resting on his trembling arm, he looked anxiously around.

'What room is this?  Where have I been brought to?' said Oliver. 'This
is not the place I went to sleep in.'

He uttered these words in a feeble voice, being very faint and weak;
but they were overheard at once.  The curtain at the bed's head was
hastily drawn back, and a motherly old lady, very neatly and precisely
dressed, rose as she undrew it, from an arm-chair close by, in which
she had been sitting at needle-work.

'Hush, my dear,' said the old lady softly.  'You must be very quiet, or
you will be ill again; and you have been very bad,--as bad as bad could
be, pretty nigh.  Lie down again; there's a dear!'  With those words,
the old lady very gently placed Oliver's head upon the pillow; and,
smoothing back his hair from his forehead, looked so kindly and loving
in his face, that he could not help placing his little withered hand in
hers, and drawing it round his neck.

'Save us!' said the old lady, with tears in her eyes.  'What a grateful
little dear it is.  Pretty creetur!  What would his mother feel if she
had sat by him as I have, and could see him now!'

'Perhaps she does see me,' whispered Oliver, folding his hands
together; 'perhaps she has sat by me.  I almost feel as if she had.'

'That was the fever, my dear,' said the old lady mildly.

'I suppose it was,' replied Oliver, 'because heaven is a long way off;
and they are too happy there, to come down to the bedside of a poor
boy.  But if she knew I was ill, she must have pitied me, even there;
for she was very ill herself before she died.  She can't know anything
about me though,' added Oliver after a moment's silence.  'If she had
seen me hurt, it would have made her sorrowful; and her face has always
looked sweet and happy, when I have dreamed of her.'

The old lady made no reply to this; but wiping her eyes first, and her
spectacles, which lay on the counterpane, afterwards, as if they were
part and parcel of those features, brought some cool stuff for Oliver
to drink; and then, patting him on the cheek, told him he must lie very
quiet, or he would be ill again.

So, Oliver kept very still; partly because he was anxious to obey the
kind old lady in all things; and partly, to tell the truth, because he
was completely exhausted with what he had already said.  He soon fell
into a gentle doze, from which he was awakened by the light of a
candle:  which, being brought near the bed, showed him a gentleman with
a very large and loud-ticking gold watch in his hand, who felt his
pulse, and said he was a great deal better.

'You _are_ a great deal better, are you not, my dear?' said the
gentleman.

'Yes, thank you, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Yes,  I know you are,' said the gentleman:  'You're hungry too, an't
you?'

'No, sir,' answered Oliver.

'Hem!' said the gentleman.  'No, I know you're not.  He is not hungry,
Mrs. Bedwin,' said the gentleman:  looking very wise.

The old lady made a respectful inclination of the head, which seemed to
say that she thought the doctor was a very clever man. The doctor
appeared much of the same opinion himself.

'You feel sleepy, don't you, my dear?' said the doctor.

'No, sir,' replied Oliver.

'No,' said the doctor, with a very shrewd and satisfied look. 'You're
not sleepy.  Nor thirsty.  Are you?'

'Yes, sir, rather thirsty,' answered Oliver.

'Just as I expected, Mrs. Bedwin,' said the doctor.  'It's very natural
that he should be thirsty.  You may give him a little tea, ma'am, and
some dry toast without any butter.  Don't keep him too warm, ma'am; but
be careful that you don't let him be too cold; will you have the
goodness?'

The old lady dropped a curtsey.  The doctor, after tasting the cool
stuff, and expressing a qualified approval of it, hurried away:  his
boots creaking in a very important and wealthy manner as he went
downstairs.

Oliver dozed off again, soon after this; when he awoke, it was nearly
twelve o'clock.  The old lady tenderly bade him good-night shortly
afterwards, and left him in charge of a fat old woman who had just
come:  bringing with her, in a little bundle, a small Prayer Book and a
large nightcap. Putting the latter on her head and the former on the
table, the old woman, after telling Oliver that she had come to sit up
with him, drew her chair close to the fire and went off into a series
of short naps, chequered at frequent intervals with sundry tumblings
forward, and divers moans and chokings. These, however, had no worse
effect than causing her to rub her nose very hard, and then fall asleep
again.

And thus the night crept slowly on.  Oliver lay awake for some time,
counting the little circles of light which the reflection of the
rushlight-shade threw upon the ceiling; or tracing with his languid
eyes the intricate pattern of the paper on the wall. The darkness and
the deep stillness of the room were very solemn; as they brought into
the boy's mind the thought that death had been hovering there, for many
days and nights, and might yet fill it with the gloom and dread of his
awful presence, he turned his face upon the pillow, and fervently
prayed to Heaven.

Gradually, he fell into that deep tranquil sleep which ease from recent
suffering alone imparts; that calm and peaceful rest which it is pain
to wake from.  Who, if this were death, would be roused again to all
the struggles and turmoils of life; to all its cares for the present;
its anxieties for the future; more than all, its weary recollections of
the past!

It had been bright day, for hours, when Oliver opened his eyes; he felt
cheerful and happy.  The crisis of the disease was safely past.  He
belonged to the world again.

In three days' time he was able to sit in an easy-chair, well propped
up with pillows; and, as he was still too weak to walk, Mrs. Bedwin had
him carried downstairs into the little housekeeper's room, which
belonged to her.  Having him set, here, by the fire-side, the good old
lady sat herself down too; and, being in a state of considerable
delight at seeing him so much better, forthwith began to cry most
violently.

'Never mind me, my dear,' said the old lady; 'I'm only having a regular
good cry.  There; it's all over now; and I'm quite comfortable.'

'You're very, very kind to me, ma'am,' said Oliver.

'Well, never you mind that, my dear,' said the old lady; 'that's got
nothing to do with your broth; and it's full time you had it; for the
doctor says Mr. Brownlow may come in to see you this morning; and we
must get up our best looks, because the better we look, the more he'll
be pleased.'  And with this, the old lady applied herself to warming
up, in a little saucepan, a basin full of broth:  strong enough, Oliver
thought, to furnish an ample dinner, when reduced to the regulation
strength, for three hundred and fifty paupers, at the lowest
computation.

'Are you fond of pictures, dear?' inquired the old lady, seeing that
Oliver had fixed his eyes, most intently, on a portrait which hung
against the wall; just opposite his chair.

'I don't quite know, ma'am,' said Oliver, without taking his eyes from
the canvas; 'I have seen so few that I hardly know.  What a beautiful,
mild face that lady's is!'

'Ah!' said the old lady, 'painters always make ladies out prettier than
they are, or they wouldn't get any custom, child. The man that invented
the machine for taking likenesses might have known that would never
succeed; it's a deal too honest.  A deal,' said the old lady, laughing
very heartily at her own acuteness.

'Is--is that a likeness, ma'am?' said Oliver.

'Yes,' said the old lady, looking up for a moment from the broth;
'that's a portrait.'

'Whose, ma'am?' asked Oliver.

'Why, really, my dear, I don't know,' answered the old lady in a
good-humoured manner.  'It's not a likeness of anybody that you or I
know, I expect.  It seems to strike your fancy, dear.'

'It is so pretty,' replied Oliver.

'Why, sure you're not afraid of it?' said the old lady: observing in
great surprise, the look of awe with which the child regarded the
painting.

'Oh no, no,' returned Oliver quickly; 'but the eyes look so sorrowful;
and where I sit, they seem fixed upon me.  It makes my heart beat,'
added Oliver in a low voice, 'as if it was alive, and wanted to speak
to me, but couldn't.'

'Lord save us!' exclaimed the old lady, starting; 'don't talk in that
way, child.  You're weak and nervous after your illness. Let me wheel
your chair round to the other side; and then you won't see it.  There!'
said the old lady, suiting the action to the word; 'you don't see it
now, at all events.'

Oliver _did_ see it in his mind's eye as distinctly as if he had not
altered his position; but he thought it better not to worry the kind
old lady; so he smiled gently when she looked at him; and Mrs. Bedwin,
satisfied that he felt more comfortable, salted and broke bits of
toasted bread into the broth, with all the bustle befitting so solemn a
preparation. Oliver got through it with extraordinary expedition.  He
had scarcely swallowed the last spoonful, when there came a soft rap at
the door.  'Come in,' said the old lady; and in walked Mr. Brownlow.

Now, the old gentleman came in as brisk as need be; but, he had no
sooner raised his spectacles on his forehead, and thrust his hands
behind the skirts of his dressing-gown to take a good long look at
Oliver, than his countenance underwent a very great variety of odd
contortions.  Oliver looked very worn and shadowy from sickness, and
made an ineffectual attempt to stand up, out of respect to his
benefactor, which terminated in his sinking back into the chair again;
and the fact is, if the truth must be told, that Mr. Brownlow's heart,
being large enough for any six ordinary old gentlemen of humane
disposition, forced a supply of tears into his eyes, by some hydraulic
process which we are not sufficiently philosophical to be in a
condition to explain.

'Poor boy, poor boy!' said Mr. Brownlow, clearing his throat. 'I'm
rather hoarse this morning, Mrs. Bedwin.  I'm afraid I have caught
cold.'

'I hope not, sir,' said Mrs. Bedwin.  'Everything you have had, has
been well aired, sir.'

'I don't know, Bedwin.  I don't know,' said Mr. Brownlow; 'I rather
think I had a damp napkin at dinner-time yesterday; but never mind
that.  How do you feel, my dear?'

'Very happy, sir,' replied Oliver.  'And very grateful indeed, sir, for
your goodness to me.'

'Good by,' said Mr. Brownlow, stoutly.  'Have you given him any
nourishment, Bedwin?  Any slops, eh?'

'He has just had a basin of beautiful strong broth, sir,' replied Mrs.
Bedwin:  drawing herself up slightly, and laying strong emphasis on the
last word:  to intimate that between slops, and broth will compounded,
there existed no affinity or connection whatsoever.

'Ugh!' said Mr. Brownlow, with a slight shudder; 'a couple of glasses
of port wine would have done him a great deal more good. Wouldn't they,
Tom White, eh?'

'My name is Oliver, sir,' replied the little invalid:  with a look of
great astonishment.

'Oliver,' said Mr. Brownlow; 'Oliver what?  Oliver White, eh?'

'No, sir, Twist, Oliver Twist.'

'Queer name!' said the old gentleman.  'What made you tell the
magistrate your name was White?'

'I never told him so, sir,' returned Oliver in amazement.

This sounded so like a falsehood, that the old gentleman looked
somewhat sternly in Oliver's face.  It was impossible to doubt him;
there was truth in every one of its thin and sharpened lineaments.

'Some mistake,' said Mr. Brownlow.  But, although his motive for
looking steadily at Oliver no longer existed, the old idea of the
resemblance between his features and some familiar face came upon him
so strongly, that he could not withdraw his gaze.

'I hope you are not angry with me, sir?' said Oliver, raising his eyes
beseechingly.

'No, no,' replied the old gentleman.  'Why! what's this?  Bedwin, look
there!'

As he spoke, he pointed hastily to the picture over Oliver's head, and
then to the boy's face.  There was its living copy. The eyes, the head,
the mouth; every feature was the same. The expression was, for the
instant, so precisely alike, that the minutest line seemed copied with
startling accuracy!

Oliver knew not the cause of this sudden exclamation; for, not being
strong enough to bear the start it gave him, he fainted away.  A
weakness on his part, which affords the narrative an opportunity of
relieving the reader from suspense, in behalf of the two young pupils
of the Merry Old Gentleman; and of recording--

That when the Dodger, and his accomplished friend Master Bates, joined
in the hue-and-cry which was raised at Oliver's heels, in consequence
of their executing an illegal conveyance of Mr. Brownlow's personal
property, as has been already described, they were actuated by a very
laudable and becoming regard for themselves; and forasmuch as the
freedom of the subject and the liberty of the individual are among the
first and proudest boasts of a true-hearted Englishman, so, I need
hardly beg the reader to observe, that this action should tend to exalt
them in the opinion of all public and patriotic men, in almost as great
a degree as this strong proof of their anxiety for their own
preservation and safety goes to corroborate and confirm the little code
of laws which certain profound and sound-judging philosophers have laid
down as the main-springs of all Nature's deeds and actions:  the said
philosophers very wisely reducing the good lady's proceedings to
matters of maxim and theory:  and, by a very neat and pretty compliment
to her exalted wisdom and understanding, putting entirely out of sight
any considerations of heart, or generous impulse and feeling. For,
these are matters totally beneath a female who is acknowledged by
universal admission to be far above the numerous little foibles and
weaknesses of her sex.

If I wanted any further proof of the strictly philosophical nature of
the conduct of these young gentlemen in their very delicate
predicament, I should at once find it in the fact (also recorded in a
foregoing part of this narrative), of their quitting the pursuit, when
the general attention was fixed upon Oliver; and making immediately for
their home by the shortest possible cut.  Although I do not mean to
assert that it is usually the practice of renowned and learned sages,
to shorten the road to any great conclusion (their course indeed being
rather to lengthen the distance, by various circumlocutions and
discursive staggerings, like unto those in which drunken men under the
pressure of a too mighty flow of ideas, are prone to indulge); still, I
do mean to say, and do say distinctly, that it is the invariable
practice of many mighty philosophers, in carrying out their theories,
to evince great wisdom and foresight in providing against every
possible contingency which can be supposed at all likely to affect
themselves.  Thus, to do a great right, you may do a little wrong; and
you may take any means which the end to be attained, will justify; the
amount of the right, or the amount of the wrong, or indeed the
distinction between the two, being left entirely to the philosopher
concerned, to be settled and determined by his clear, comprehensive,
and impartial view of his own particular case.

It was not until the two boys had scoured, with great rapidity, through
a most intricate maze of narrow streets and courts, that they ventured
to halt beneath a low and dark archway.  Having remained silent here,
just long enough to recover breath to speak, Master Bates uttered an
exclamation of amusement and delight; and, bursting into an
uncontrollable fit of laughter, flung himself upon a doorstep, and
rolled thereon in a transport of mirth.

'What's the matter?' inquired the Dodger.

'Ha! ha! ha!' roared Charley Bates.

'Hold your noise,' remonstrated the Dodger, looking cautiously round.
'Do you want to be grabbed, stupid?'

'I can't help it,' said Charley, 'I can't help it!  To see him
splitting away at that pace, and cutting round the corners, and
knocking up again' the posts, and starting on again as if he was made
of iron as well as them, and me with the wipe in my pocket, singing out
arter him--oh, my eye!' The vivid imagination of Master Bates presented
the scene before him in too strong colours.  As he arrived at this
apostrophe, he again rolled upon the door-step, and laughed louder than
before.

'What'll Fagin say?' inquired the Dodger; taking advantage of the next
interval of breathlessness on the part of his friend to propound the
question.

'What?' repeated Charley Bates.

'Ah, what?' said the Dodger.

'Why, what should he say?' inquired Charley:  stopping rather suddenly
in his merriment; for the Dodger's manner was impressive.  'What should
he say?'

Mr. Dawkins whistled for a couple of minutes; then, taking off his hat,
scratched his head, and nodded thrice.

'What do you mean?' said Charley.

'Toor rul lol loo, gammon and spinnage, the frog he wouldn't, and high
cockolorum,' said the Dodger:  with a slight sneer on his intellectual
countenance.

This was explanatory, but not satisfactory.  Master Bates felt it so;
and again said, 'What do you mean?'

The Dodger made no reply; but putting his hat on again, and gathering
the skirts of his long-tailed coat under his arm, thrust his tongue
into his cheek, slapped the bridge of his nose some half-dozen times in
a familiar but expressive manner, and turning on his heel, slunk down
the court.  Master Bates followed, with a thoughtful countenance.

The noise of footsteps on the creaking stairs, a few minutes after the
occurrence of this conversation, roused the merry old gentleman as he
sat over the fire with a saveloy and a small loaf in his hand; a
pocket-knife in his right; and a pewter pot on the trivet.  There was a
rascally smile on his white face as he turned round, and looking
sharply out from under his thick red eyebrows, bent his ear towards the
door, and listened.

'Why, how's this?' muttered the Jew:  changing countenance; 'only two
of 'em?  Where's the third?  They can't have got into trouble.  Hark!'

The footsteps approached nearer; they reached the landing. The door was
slowly opened; and the Dodger and Charley Bates entered, closing it
behind them.



CHAPTER XIII

SOME NEW ACQUAINTANCES ARE INTRODUCED TO THE INTELLIGENT READER,
CONNECTED WITH WHOM VARIOUS PLEASANT MATTERS ARE RELATED, APPERTAINING
TO THIS HISTORY

'Where's Oliver?' said the Jew, rising with a menacing look. 'Where's
the boy?'

The young thieves eyed their preceptor as if they were alarmed at his
violence; and looked uneasily at each other.  But they made no reply.

'What's become of the boy?' said the Jew, seizing the Dodger tightly by
the collar, and threatening him with horrid imprecations.  'Speak out,
or I'll throttle you!'

Mr. Fagin looked so very much in earnest, that Charley Bates, who
deemed it prudent in all cases to be on the safe side, and who
conceived it by no means improbable that it might be his turn to be
throttled second, dropped upon his knees, and raised a loud,
well-sustained, and continuous roar--something between a mad bull and a
speaking trumpet.

'Will you speak?' thundered the Jew:  shaking the Dodger so much that
his keeping in the big coat at all, seemed perfectly miraculous.

'Why, the traps have got him, and that's all about it,' said the
Dodger, sullenly.  'Come, let go o' me, will you!'  And, swinging
himself, at one jerk, clean out of the big coat, which he left in the
Jew's hands, the Dodger snatched up the toasting fork, and made a pass
at the merry old gentleman's waistcoat; which, if it had taken effect,
would have let a little more merriment out than could have been easily
replaced.

The Jew stepped back in this emergency, with more agility than could
have been anticipated in a man of his apparent decrepitude; and,
seizing up the pot, prepared to hurl it at his assailant's head.  But
Charley Bates, at this moment, calling his attention by a perfectly
terrific howl, he suddenly altered its destination, and flung it full
at that young gentleman.

'Why, what the blazes is in the wind now!' growled a deep voice. 'Who
pitched that 'ere at me?  It's well it's the beer, and not the pot, as
hit me, or I'd have settled somebody.  I might have know'd, as nobody
but an infernal, rich, plundering, thundering old Jew could afford to
throw away any drink but water--and not that, unless he done the River
Company every quarter.  Wot's it all about, Fagin?  D--me, if my
neck-handkercher an't lined with beer!  Come in, you sneaking warmint;
wot are you stopping outside for, as if you was ashamed of your master!
Come in!'

The man who growled out these words, was a stoutly-built fellow of
about five-and-thirty, in a black velveteen coat, very soiled drab
breeches, lace-up half boots, and grey cotton stockings which inclosed
a bulky pair of legs, with large swelling calves;--the kind of legs,
which in such costume, always look in an unfinished and incomplete
state without a set of fetters to garnish them.  He had a brown hat on
his head, and a dirty belcher handkerchief round his neck:  with the
long frayed ends of which he smeared the beer from his face as he
spoke.  He disclosed, when he had done so, a broad heavy countenance
with a beard of three days' growth, and two scowling eyes; one of which
displayed various parti-coloured symptoms of having been recently
damaged by a blow.

'Come in, d'ye hear?' growled this engaging ruffian.

A white shaggy dog, with his face scratched and torn in twenty
different places, skulked into the room.

'Why didn't you come in afore?' said the man.  'You're getting too
proud to own me afore company, are you?  Lie down!'

This command was accompanied with a kick, which sent the animal to the
other end of the room.  He appeared well used to it, however; for he
coiled himself up in a corner very quietly, without uttering a sound,
and winking his very ill-looking eyes twenty times in a minute,
appeared to occupy himself in taking a survey of the apartment.

'What are you up to?  Ill-treating the boys, you covetous, avaricious,
in-sa-ti-a-ble old fence?' said the man, seating himself deliberately.
'I wonder they don't murder you!  I would if I was them.  If I'd been
your 'prentice, I'd have done it long ago, and--no, I couldn't have
sold you afterwards, for you're fit for nothing but keeping as a
curiousity of ugliness in a glass bottle, and I suppose they don't blow
glass bottles large enough.'

'Hush! hush! Mr. Sikes,' said the Jew, trembling; 'don't speak so loud!'

'None of your mistering,' replied the ruffian; 'you always mean
mischief when you come that.  You know my name:  out with it!  I shan't
disgrace it when the time comes.'

'Well, well, then--Bill Sikes,' said the Jew, with abject humility.
'You seem out of humour, Bill.'

'Perhaps I am,' replied Sikes; 'I should think you was rather out of
sorts too, unless you mean as little harm when you throw pewter pots
about, as you do when you blab and--'

'Are you mad?' said the Jew, catching the man by the sleeve, and
pointing towards the boys.

Mr. Sikes contented himself with tying an imaginary knot under his left
ear, and jerking his head over on the right shoulder; a piece of dumb
show which the Jew appeared to understand perfectly.  He then, in cant
terms, with which his whole conversation was plentifully besprinkled,
but which would be quite unintelligible if they were recorded here,
demanded a glass of liquor.

'And mind you don't poison it,' said Mr. Sikes, laying his hat upon the
table.

This was said in jest; but if the speaker could have seen the evil leer
with which the Jew bit his pale lip as he turned round to the cupboard,
he might have thought the caution not wholly unnecessary, or the wish
(at all events) to improve upon the distiller's ingenuity not very far
from the old gentleman's merry heart.

After swallowing two of three glasses of spirits, Mr. Sikes
condescended to take some notice of the young gentlemen; which gracious
act led to a conversation, in which the cause and manner of Oliver's
capture were circumstantially detailed, with such alterations and
improvements on the truth, as to the Dodger appeared most advisable
under the circumstances.

'I'm afraid,' said the Jew, 'that he may say something which will get
us into trouble.'

'That's very likely,' returned Sikes with a malicious grin. 'You're
blowed upon, Fagin.'

'And I'm afraid, you see,' added the Jew, speaking as if he had not
noticed the interruption; and regarding the other closely as he did
so,--'I'm afraid that, if the game was up with us, it might be up with
a good many more, and that it would come out rather worse for you than
it would for me, my dear.'

The man started, and turned round upon the Jew.  But the old
gentleman's shoulders were shrugged up to his ears; and his eyes were
vacantly staring on the opposite wall.

There was a long pause. Every member of the respectable coterie
appeared plunged in his own reflections; not excepting the dog, who by
a certain malicious licking of his lips seemed to be meditating an
attack upon the legs of the first gentleman or lady he might encounter
in the streets when he went out.

'Somebody must find out wot's been done at the office,' said Mr. Sikes
in a much lower tone than he had taken since he came in.

The Jew nodded assent.

'If he hasn't peached, and is committed, there's no fear till he comes
out again,' said Mr. Sikes, 'and then he must be taken care on.  You
must get hold of him somehow.'

Again the Jew nodded.

The prudence of this line of action, indeed, was obvious; but,
unfortunately, there was one very strong objection to its being
adopted.  This was, that the Dodger, and Charley Bates, and Fagin, and
Mr. William Sikes, happened, one and all, to entertain a violent and
deeply-rooted antipathy to going near a police-office on any ground or
pretext whatever.

How long they might have sat and looked at each other, in a state of
uncertainty not the most pleasant of its kind, it is difficult to
guess.  It is not necessary to make any guesses on the subject,
however; for the sudden entrance of the two young ladies whom Oliver
had seen on a former occasion, caused the conversation to flow afresh.

'The very thing!' said the Jew.  'Bet will go; won't you, my dear?'

'Wheres?' inquired the young lady.

'Only just up to the office, my dear,' said the Jew coaxingly.

It is due to the young lady to say that she did not positively affirm
that she would not, but that she merely expressed an emphatic and
earnest desire to be 'blessed' if she would; a polite and delicate
evasion of the request, which shows the young lady to have been
possessed of that natural good breeding which cannot bear to inflict
upon a fellow-creature, the pain of a direct and pointed refusal.

The Jew's countenance fell.  He turned from this young lady, who was
gaily, not to say gorgeously attired, in a red gown, green boots, and
yellow curl-papers, to the other female.

'Nancy, my dear,' said the Jew in a soothing manner, 'what do YOU say?'

'That it won't do; so it's no use a-trying it on, Fagin,' replied Nancy.

'What do you mean by that?' said Mr. Sikes, looking up in a surly
manner.

'What I say, Bill,' replied the lady collectedly.

'Why, you're just the very person for it,' reasoned Mr. Sikes: 'nobody
about here knows anything of you.'

'And as I don't want 'em to, neither,' replied Nancy in the same
composed manner, 'it's rather more no than yes with me, Bill.'

'She'll go, Fagin,' said Sikes.

'No, she won't, Fagin,' said Nancy.

'Yes, she will, Fagin,' said Sikes.

And Mr. Sikes was right.  By dint of alternate threats, promises, and
bribes, the lady in question was ultimately prevailed upon to undertake
the commission.  She was not, indeed, withheld by the same
considerations as her agreeable friend; for, having recently removed
into the neighborhood of Field Lane from the remote but genteel suburb
of Ratcliffe, she was not under the same apprehension of being
recognised by any of her numerous acquaintances.

Accordingly, with a clean white apron tied over her gown, and her
curl-papers tucked up under a straw bonnet,--both articles of dress
being provided from the Jew's inexhaustible stock,--Miss Nancy prepared
to issue forth on her errand.

'Stop a minute, my dear,' said the Jew, producing, a little covered
basket.  'Carry that in one hand.  It looks more respectable, my dear.'

'Give her a door-key to carry in her t'other one, Fagin,' said Sikes;
'it looks real and genivine like.'

'Yes, yes, my dear, so it does,' said the Jew, hanging a large
street-door key on the forefinger of the young lady's right hand.

'There; very good!  Very good indeed, my dear!' said the Jew, rubbing
his hands.

'Oh, my brother!  My poor, dear, sweet, innocent little brother!'
exclaimed Nancy, bursting into tears, and wringing the little basket
and the street-door key in an agony of distress.  'What has become of
him!  Where have they taken him to!  Oh, do have pity, and tell me
what's been done with the dear boy, gentlemen; do, gentlemen, if you
please, gentlemen!'

Having uttered those words in a most lamentable and heart-broken tone:
to the immeasurable delight of her hearers:  Miss Nancy paused, winked
to the company, nodded smilingly round, and disappeared.

'Ah, she's a clever girl, my dears,' said the Jew, turning round to his
young friends, and shaking his head gravely, as if in mute admonition
to them to follow the bright example they had just beheld.

'She's a honour to her sex,' said Mr. Sikes, filling his glass, and
smiting the table with his enormous fist.  'Here's her health, and
wishing they was all like her!'

While these, and many other encomiums, were being passed on the
accomplished Nancy, that young lady made the best of her way to the
police-office; whither, notwithstanding a little natural timidity
consequent upon walking through the streets alone and unprotected, she
arrived in perfect safety shortly afterwards.

Entering by the back way, she tapped softly with the key at one of the
cell-doors, and listened.  There was no sound within:  so she coughed
and listened again.  Still there was no reply:  so she spoke.

'Nolly, dear?' murmured Nancy in a gentle voice; 'Nolly?'

There was nobody inside but a miserable shoeless criminal, who had been
taken up for playing the flute, and who, the offence against society
having been clearly proved, had been very properly committed by Mr.
Fang to the House of Correction for one month; with the appropriate and
amusing remark that since he had so much breath to spare, it would be
more wholesomely expended on the treadmill than in a musical
instrument.  He made no answer: being occupied mentally bewailing the
loss of the flute, which had been confiscated for the use of the
county:  so Nancy passed on to the next cell, and knocked there.

'Well!' cried a faint and feeble voice.

'Is there a little boy here?' inquired Nancy, with a preliminary sob.

'No,' replied the voice; 'God forbid.'

This was a vagrant of sixty-five, who was going to prison for _not_
playing the flute; or, in other words, for begging in the streets, and
doing nothing for his livelihood.  In the next cell was another man,
who was going to the same prison for hawking tin saucepans without
license; thereby doing something for his living, in defiance of the
Stamp-office.

But, as neither of these criminals answered to the name of Oliver, or
knew anything about him, Nancy made straight up to the bluff officer in
the striped waistcoat; and with the most piteous wailings and
lamentations, rendered more piteous by a prompt and efficient use of
the street-door key and the little basket, demanded her own dear
brother.

'I haven't got him, my dear,' said the old man.

'Where is he?' screamed Nancy, in a distracted manner.

'Why, the gentleman's got him,' replied the officer.

'What gentleman!  Oh, gracious heavens!  What gentleman?' exclaimed
Nancy.

In reply to this incoherent questioning, the old man informed the
deeply affected sister that Oliver had been taken ill in the office,
and discharged in consequence of a witness having proved the robbery to
have been committed by another boy, not in custody; and that the
prosecutor had carried him away, in an insensible condition, to his own
residence:  of and concerning which, all the informant knew was, that
it was somewhere in Pentonville, he having heard that word mentioned in
the directions to the coachman.

In a dreadful state of doubt and uncertainty, the agonised young woman
staggered to the gate, and then, exchanging her faltering walk for a
swift run, returned by the most devious and complicated route she could
think of, to the domicile of the Jew.

Mr. Bill Sikes no sooner heard the account of the expedition delivered,
than he very hastily called up the white dog, and, putting on his hat,
expeditiously departed:  without devoting any time to the formality of
wishing the company good-morning.

'We must know where he is, my dears; he must be found,' said the Jew
greatly excited.  'Charley, do nothing but skulk about, till you bring
home some news of him!  Nancy, my dear, I must have him found.  I trust
to you, my dear,--to you and the Artful for everything!  Stay, stay,'
added the Jew, unlocking a drawer with a shaking hand; 'there's money,
my dears.  I shall shut up this shop to-night.  You'll know where to
find me!  Don't stop here a minute.  Not an instant, my dears!'

With these words, he pushed them from the room:  and carefully
double-locking and barring the door behind them, drew from its place of
concealment the box which he had unintentionally disclosed to Oliver.
Then, he hastily proceeded to dispose the watches and jewellery beneath
his clothing.

A rap at the door startled him in this occupation.  'Who's there?' he
cried in a shrill tone.

'Me!' replied the voice of the Dodger, through the key-hole.

'What now?' cried the Jew impatiently.

'Is he to be kidnapped to the other ken, Nancy says?' inquired the
Dodger.

'Yes,' replied the Jew, 'wherever she lays hands on him.  Find him,
find him out, that's all.  I shall know what to do next; never fear.'

The boy murmured a reply of intelligence:  and hurried downstairs after
his companions.

'He has not peached so far,' said the Jew as he pursued his occupation.
'If he means to blab us among his new friends, we may stop his mouth
yet.'



CHAPTER XIV

COMPRISING FURTHER PARTICULARS OF OLIVER'S STAY AT MR. BROWNLOW'S, WITH
THE REMARKABLE PREDICTION WHICH ONE MR. GRIMWIG UTTERED CONCERNING HIM,
WHEN HE WENT OUT ON AN ERRAND

Oliver soon recovering from the fainting-fit into which Mr. Brownlow's
abrupt exclamation had thrown him, the subject of the picture was
carefully avoided, both by the old gentleman and Mrs. Bedwin, in the
conversation that ensued:  which indeed bore no reference to Oliver's
history or prospects, but was confined to such topics as might amuse
without exciting him.  He was still too weak to get up to breakfast;
but, when he came down into the housekeeper's room next day, his first
act was to cast an eager glance at the wall, in the hope of again
looking on the face of the beautiful lady.  His expectations were
disappointed, however, for the picture had been removed.

'Ah!' said the housekeeper, watching the direction of Oliver's eyes.
'It is gone, you see.'

'I see it is ma'am,' replied Oliver.  'Why have they taken it away?'

'It has been taken down, child, because Mr. Brownlow said, that as it
seemed to worry you, perhaps it might prevent your getting well, you
know,' rejoined the old lady.

'Oh, no, indeed.  It didn't worry me, ma'am,' said Oliver. 'I liked to
see it.  I quite loved it.'

'Well, well!' said the old lady, good-humouredly; 'you get well as fast
as ever you can, dear, and it shall be hung up again. There!  I promise
you that!  Now, let us talk about something else.'

This was all the information Oliver could obtain about the picture at
that time.  As the old lady had been so kind to him in his illness, he
endeavoured to think no more of the subject just then; so he listened
attentively to a great many stories she told him, about an amiable and
handsome daughter of hers, who was married to an amiable and handsome
man, and lived in the country; and about a son, who was clerk to a
merchant in the West Indies; and who was, also, such a good young man,
and wrote such dutiful letters home four times a-year, that it brought
the tears into her eyes to talk about them.  When the old lady had
expatiated, a long time, on the excellences of her children, and the
merits of her kind good husband besides, who had been dead and gone,
poor dear soul! just six-and-twenty years, it was time to have tea.
After tea she began to teach Oliver cribbage: which he learnt as
quickly as she could teach:  and at which game they played, with great
interest and gravity, until it was time for the invalid to have some
warm wine and water, with a slice of dry toast, and then to go cosily
to bed.

They were happy days, those of Oliver's recovery.  Everything was so
quiet, and neat, and orderly; everybody so kind and gentle; that after
the noise and turbulence in the midst of which he had always lived, it
seemed like Heaven itself.  He was no sooner strong enough to put his
clothes on, properly, than Mr. Brownlow caused a complete new suit, and
a new cap, and a new pair of shoes, to be provided for him.  As Oliver
was told that he might do what he liked with the old clothes, he gave
them to a servant who had been very kind to him, and asked her to sell
them to a Jew, and keep the money for herself.  This she very readily
did; and, as Oliver looked out of the parlour window, and saw the Jew
roll them up in his bag and walk away, he felt quite delighted to think
that they were safely gone, and that there was now no possible danger
of his ever being able to wear them again.  They were sad rags, to tell
the truth; and Oliver had never had a new suit before.

One evening, about a week after the affair of the picture, as he was
sitting talking to Mrs. Bedwin, there came a message down from Mr.
Brownlow, that if Oliver Twist felt pretty well, he should like to see
him in his study, and talk to him a little while.

'Bless us, and save us!  Wash your hands, and let me part your hair
nicely for you, child,' said Mrs. Bedwin.  'Dear heart alive!  If we
had known he would have asked for you, we would have put you a clean
collar on, and made you as smart as sixpence!'

Oliver did as the old lady bade him; and, although she lamented
grievously, meanwhile, that there was not even time to crimp the little
frill that bordered his shirt-collar; he looked so delicate and
handsome, despite that important personal advantage, that she went so
far as to say:  looking at him with great complacency from head to
foot, that she really didn't think it would have been possible, on the
longest notice, to have made much difference in him for the better.

Thus encouraged, Oliver tapped at the study door.  On Mr. Brownlow
calling to him to come in, he found himself in a little back room,
quite full of books, with a window, looking into some pleasant little
gardens.  There was a table drawn up before the window, at which Mr.
Brownlow was seated reading.  When he saw Oliver, he pushed the book
away from him, and told him to come near the table, and sit down.
Oliver complied; marvelling where the people could be found to read
such a great number of books as seemed to be written to make the world
wiser.  Which is still a marvel to more experienced people than Oliver
Twist, every day of their lives.

'There are a good many books, are there not, my boy?' said Mr.
Brownlow, observing the curiosity with which Oliver surveyed the
shelves that reached from the floor to the ceiling.

'A great number, sir,' replied Oliver.  'I never saw so many.'

'You shall read them, if you behave well,' said the old gentleman
kindly; 'and you will like that, better than looking at the
outsides,--that is, some cases; because there are books of which the
backs and covers are by far the best parts.'

'I suppose they are those heavy ones, sir,' said Oliver, pointing to
some large quartos, with a good deal of gilding about the binding.

'Not always those,' said the old gentleman, patting Oliver on the head,
and smiling as he did so; 'there are other equally heavy ones, though
of a much smaller size.  How should you like to grow up a clever man,
and write books, eh?'

'I think I would rather read them, sir,' replied Oliver.

'What! wouldn't you like to be a book-writer?' said the old gentleman.

Oliver considered a little while; and at last said, he should think it
would be a much better thing to be a book-seller; upon which the old
gentleman laughed heartily, and declared he had said a very good thing.
Which Oliver felt glad to have done, though he by no means knew what it
was.

'Well, well,' said the old gentleman, composing his features. 'Don't be
afraid!  We won't make an author of you, while there's an honest trade
to be learnt, or brick-making to turn to.'

'Thank you, sir,' said Oliver.  At the earnest manner of his reply, the
old gentleman laughed again; and said something about a curious
instinct, which Oliver, not understanding, paid no very great attention
to.

'Now,' said Mr. Brownlow, speaking if possible in a kinder, but at the
same time in a much more serious manner, than Oliver had ever known him
assume yet, 'I want you to pay great attention, my boy, to what I am
going to say.  I shall talk to you without any reserve; because I am
sure you are well able to understand me, as many older persons would
be.'

'Oh, don't tell you are going to send me away, sir, pray!' exclaimed
Oliver, alarmed at the serious tone of the old gentleman's
commencement!  'Don't turn me out of doors to wander in the streets
again.  Let me stay here, and be a servant.  Don't send me back to the
wretched place I came from.  Have mercy upon a poor boy, sir!'

'My dear child,' said the old gentleman, moved by the warmth of
Oliver's sudden appeal; 'you need not be afraid of my deserting you,
unless you give me cause.'

'I never, never will, sir,' interposed Oliver.

'I hope not,' rejoined the old gentleman.  'I do not think you ever
will.  I have been deceived, before, in the objects whom I have
endeavoured to benefit; but I feel strongly disposed to trust you,
nevertheless; and I am more interested in your behalf than I can well
account for, even to myself.  The persons on whom I have bestowed my
dearest love, lie deep in their graves; but, although the happiness and
delight of my life lie buried there too, I have not made a coffin of my
heart, and sealed it up, forever, on my best affections.  Deep
affliction has but strengthened and refined them.'

As the old gentleman said this in a low voice:  more to himself than to
his companion:  and as he remained silent for a short time afterwards:
Oliver sat quite still.

'Well, well!' said the old gentleman at length, in a more cheerful
tone, 'I only say this, because you have a young heart; and knowing
that I have suffered great pain and sorrow, you will be more careful,
perhaps, not to wound me again.  You say you are an orphan, without a
friend in the world; all the inquiries I have been able to make,
confirm the statement.  Let me hear your story; where you come from;
who brought you up; and how you got into the company in which I found
you.  Speak the truth, and you shall not be friendless while I live.'

Oliver's sobs checked his utterance for some minutes; when he was on
the point of beginning to relate how he had been brought up at the
farm, and carried to the workhouse by Mr. Bumble, a peculiarly
impatient little double-knock was heard at the street-door:  and the
servant, running upstairs, announced Mr. Grimwig.

'Is he coming up?' inquired Mr. Brownlow.

'Yes, sir,' replied the servant.  'He asked if there were any muffins
in the house; and, when I told him yes, he said he had come to tea.'

Mr. Brownlow smiled; and, turning to Oliver, said that Mr. Grimwig was
an old friend of his, and he must not mind his being a little rough in
his manners; for he was a worthy creature at bottom, as he had reason
to know.

'Shall I go downstairs, sir?' inquired Oliver.

'No,' replied Mr. Brownlow, 'I would rather you remained here.'

At this moment, there walked into the room:  supporting himself by a
thick stick:  a stout old gentleman, rather lame in one leg, who was
dressed in a blue coat, striped waistcoat, nankeen breeches and
gaiters, and a broad-brimmed white hat, with the sides turned up with
green.  A very small-plaited shirt frill stuck out from his waistcoat;
and a very long steel watch-chain, with nothing but a key at the end,
dangled loosely below it.  The ends of his white neckerchief were
twisted into a ball about the size of an orange; the variety of shapes
into which his countenance was twisted, defy description.  He had a
manner of screwing his head on one side when he spoke; and of looking
out of the corners of his eyes at the same time:  which irresistibly
reminded the beholder of a parrot.  In this attitude, he fixed himself,
the moment he made his appearance; and, holding out a small piece of
orange-peel at arm's length, exclaimed, in a growling, discontented
voice.

'Look here! do you see this!  Isn't it a most wonderful and
extraordinary thing that I can't call at a man's house but I find a
piece of this poor surgeon's friend on the staircase? I've been lamed
with orange-peel once, and I know orange-peel will be my death, or I'll
be content to eat my own head, sir!'

This was the handsome offer with which Mr. Grimwig backed and confirmed
nearly every assertion he made; and it was the more singular in his
case, because, even admitting for the sake of argument, the possibility
of scientific improvements being brought to that pass which will enable
a gentleman to eat his own head in the event of his being so disposed,
Mr. Grimwig's head was such a particularly large one, that the most
sanguine man alive could hardly entertain a hope of being able to get
through it at a sitting--to put entirely out of the question, a very
thick coating of powder.

'I'll eat my head, sir,' repeated Mr. Grimwig, striking his stick upon
the ground.  'Hallo! what's that!' looking at Oliver, and retreating a
pace or two.

'This is young Oliver Twist, whom we were speaking about,' said Mr.
Brownlow.

Oliver bowed.

'You don't mean to say that's the boy who had the fever, I hope?' said
Mr. Grimwig, recoiling a little more.  'Wait a minute! Don't speak!
Stop--' continued Mr. Grimwig, abruptly, losing all dread of the fever
in his triumph at the discovery; 'that's the boy who had the orange!
If that's not the boy, sir, who had the orange, and threw this bit of
peel upon the staircase, I'll eat my head, and his too.'

'No, no, he has not had one,' said Mr. Brownlow, laughing. 'Come!  Put
down your hat; and speak to my young friend.'

'I feel strongly on this subject, sir,' said the irritable old
gentleman, drawing off his gloves.  'There's always more or less
orange-peel on the pavement in our street; and I _know_ it's put there
by the surgeon's boy at the corner.  A young woman stumbled over a bit
last night, and fell against my garden-railings; directly she got up I
saw her look towards his infernal red lamp with the pantomime-light.
"Don't go to him," I called out of the window, "he's an assassin!  A
man-trap!"  So he is.  If he is not--'  Here the irascible old
gentleman gave a great knock on the ground with his stick; which was
always understood, by his friends, to imply the customary offer,
whenever it was not expressed in words. Then, still keeping his stick
in his hand, he sat down; and, opening a double eye-glass, which he
wore attached to a broad black riband, took a view of Oliver:  who,
seeing that he was the object of inspection, coloured, and bowed again.

'That's the boy, is it?' said Mr. Grimwig, at length.

'That's the boy,' replied Mr. Brownlow.

'How are you, boy?' said Mr. Grimwig.

'A great deal better, thank you, sir,' replied Oliver.

Mr. Brownlow, seeming to apprehend that his singular friend was about
to say something disagreeable, asked Oliver to step downstairs and tell
Mrs. Bedwin they were ready for tea; which, as he did not half like the
visitor's manner, he was very happy to do.

'He is a nice-looking boy, is he not?' inquired Mr. Brownlow.

'I don't know,' replied Mr. Grimwig, pettishly.

'Don't know?'

'No.  I don't know.  I never see any difference in boys.  I only knew
two sort of boys.  Mealy boys, and beef-faced boys.'

'And which is Oliver?'

'Mealy.  I know a friend who has a beef-faced boy; a fine boy, they
call him; with a round head, and red cheeks, and glaring eyes; a horrid
boy; with a body and limbs that appear to be swelling out of the seams
of his blue clothes; with the voice of a pilot, and the appetite of a
wolf.  I know him!  The wretch!'

'Come,' said Mr. Brownlow, 'these are not the characteristics of young
Oliver Twist; so he needn't excite your wrath.'

'They are not,' replied Mr. Grimwig.  'He may have worse.'

Here, Mr. Brownlow coughed impatiently; which appeared to afford Mr.
Grimwig the most exquisite delight.

'He may have worse, I say,' repeated Mr. Grimwig.  'Where does he come
from!  Who is he?  What is he?  He has had a fever.  What of that?
Fevers are not peculiar to good people; are they?  Bad people have
fevers sometimes; haven't they, eh?  I knew a man who was hung in
Jamaica for murdering his master.  He had had a fever six times; he
wasn't recommended to mercy on that account.  Pooh! nonsense!'

Now, the fact was, that in the inmost recesses of his own heart, Mr.
Grimwig was strongly disposed to admit that Oliver's appearance and
manner were unusually prepossessing; but he had a strong appetite for
contradiction, sharpened on this occasion by the finding of the
orange-peel; and, inwardly determining that no man should dictate to
him whether a boy was well-looking or not, he had resolved, from the
first, to oppose his friend.  When Mr. Brownlow admitted that on no one
point of inquiry could he yet return a satisfactory answer; and that he
had postponed any investigation into Oliver's previous history until he
thought the boy was strong enough to hear it; Mr. Grimwig chuckled
maliciously.  And he demanded, with a sneer, whether the housekeeper
was in the habit of counting the plate at night; because if she didn't
find a table-spoon or two missing some sunshiny morning, why, he would
be content to--and so forth.

All this, Mr. Brownlow, although himself somewhat of an impetuous
gentleman:  knowing his friend's peculiarities, bore with great good
humour; as Mr. Grimwig, at tea, was graciously pleased to express his
entire approval of the muffins, matters went on very smoothly; and
Oliver, who made one of the party, began to feel more at his ease than
he had yet done in the fierce old gentleman's presence.

'And when are you going to hear a full, true, and particular account of
the life and adventures of Oliver Twist?' asked Grimwig of Mr.
Brownlow, at the conclusion of the meal; looking sideways at Oliver, as
he resumed his subject.

'To-morrow morning,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'I would rather he was
alone with me at the time.  Come up to me to-morrow morning at ten
o'clock, my dear.'

'Yes, sir,' replied Oliver.  He answered with some hesitation, because
he was confused by Mr. Grimwig's looking so hard at him.

'I'll tell you what,' whispered that gentleman to Mr. Brownlow; 'he
won't come up to you to-morrow morning.  I saw him hesitate. He is
deceiving you, my good friend.'

'I'll swear he is not,' replied Mr. Brownlow, warmly.

'If he is not,' said Mr. Grimwig, 'I'll--' and down went the stick.

'I'll answer for that boy's truth with my life!' said Mr. Brownlow,
knocking the table.

'And I for his falsehood with my head!' rejoined Mr. Grimwig, knocking
the table also.

'We shall see,' said Mr. Brownlow, checking his rising anger.

'We will,' replied Mr. Grimwig, with a provoking smile;  'we will.'

As fate would have it, Mrs. Bedwin chanced to bring in, at this moment,
a small parcel of books, which Mr. Brownlow had that morning purchased
of the identical bookstall-keeper, who has already figured in this
history; having laid them on the table, she prepared to leave the room.

'Stop the boy, Mrs. Bedwin!' said Mr. Brownlow; 'there is something to
go back.'

'He has gone, sir,' replied Mrs. Bedwin.

'Call after him,' said Mr. Brownlow; 'it's particular.  He is a poor
man, and they are not paid for.  There are some books to be taken back,
too.'

The street-door was opened.  Oliver ran one way; and the girl ran
another; and Mrs. Bedwin stood on the step and screamed for the boy;
but there was no boy in sight.  Oliver and the girl returned, in a
breathless state, to report that there were no tidings of him.

'Dear me, I am very sorry for that,' exclaimed Mr. Brownlow; 'I
particularly wished those books to be returned to-night.'

'Send Oliver with them,' said Mr. Grimwig, with an ironical smile; 'he
will be sure to deliver them safely, you know.'

'Yes; do let me take them, if you please, sir,' said Oliver. 'I'll run
all the way, sir.'

The old gentleman was just going to say that Oliver should not go out
on any account; when a most malicious cough from Mr. Grimwig determined
him that he should; and that, by his prompt discharge of the
commission, he should prove to him the injustice of his suspicions:  on
this head at least:  at once.

'You _shall_ go, my dear,' said the old gentleman.  'The books are on a
chair by my table.  Fetch them down.'

Oliver, delighted to be of use, brought down the books under his arm in
a great bustle; and waited, cap in hand, to hear what message he was to
take.

'You are to say,' said Mr. Brownlow, glancing steadily at Grimwig; 'you
are to say that you have brought those books back; and that you have
come to pay the four pound ten I owe him.  This is a five-pound note,
so you will have to bring me back, ten shillings change.'

'I won't be ten minutes, sir,' said Oliver, eagerly.  Having buttoned
up the bank-note in his jacket pocket, and placed the books carefully
under his arm, he made a respectful bow, and left the room.  Mrs.
Bedwin followed him to the street-door, giving him many directions
about the nearest way, and the name of the bookseller, and the name of
the street:  all of which Oliver said he clearly understood.  Having
superadded many injunctions to be sure and not take cold, the old lady
at length permitted him to depart.

'Bless his sweet face!' said the old lady, looking after him. 'I can't
bear, somehow, to let him go out of my sight.'

At this moment, Oliver looked gaily round, and nodded before he turned
the corner.  The old lady smilingly returned his salutation, and,
closing the door, went back to her own room.

'Let me see; he'll be back in twenty minutes, at the longest,' said Mr.
Brownlow, pulling out his watch, and placing it on the table.  'It will
be dark by that time.'

'Oh! you really expect him to come back, do you?' inquired Mr. Grimwig.

'Don't you?' asked Mr. Brownlow, smiling.

The spirit of contradiction was strong in Mr. Grimwig's breast, at the
moment; and it was rendered stronger by his friend's confident smile.

'No,' he said, smiting the table with his fist, 'I do not. The boy has
a new suit of clothes on his back, a set of valuable books under his
arm, and a five-pound note in his pocket.  He'll join his old friends
the thieves, and laugh at you.  If ever that boy returns to this house,
sir, I'll eat my head.'

With these words he drew his chair closer to the table; and there the
two friends sat, in silent expectation, with the watch between them.

It is worthy of remark, as illustrating the importance we attach to our
own judgments, and the pride with which we put forth our most rash and
hasty conclusions, that, although Mr. Grimwig was not by any means a
bad-hearted man, and though he would have been unfeignedly sorry to see
his respected friend duped and deceived, he really did most earnestly
and strongly hope at that moment, that Oliver Twist might not come back.

It grew so dark, that the figures on the dial-plate were scarcely
discernible; but there the two old gentlemen continued to sit, in
silence, with the watch between them.



CHAPTER XV

SHOWING HOW VERY FOND OF OLIVER TWIST, THE MERRY OLD JEW AND MISS NANCY
WERE

In the obscure parlour of a low public-house, in the filthiest part of
Little Saffron Hill; a dark and gloomy den, where a flaring gas-light
burnt all day in the winter-time; and where no ray of sun ever shone in
the summer:  there sat, brooding over a little pewter measure and a
small glass, strongly impregnated with the smell of liquor, a man in a
velveteen coat, drab shorts, half-boots and stockings, whom even by
that dim light no experienced agent of the police would have hesitated
to recognise as Mr. William Sikes.  At his feet, sat a white-coated,
red-eyed dog; who occupied himself, alternately, in winking at his
master with both eyes at the same time; and in licking a large, fresh
cut on one side of his mouth, which appeared to be the result of some
recent conflict.

'Keep quiet, you warmint!  Keep quiet!' said Mr. Sikes, suddenly
breaking silence.  Whether his meditations were so intense as to be
disturbed by the dog's winking, or whether his feelings were so wrought
upon by his reflections that they required all the relief derivable
from kicking an unoffending animal to allay them, is matter for
argument and consideration.  Whatever was the cause, the effect was a
kick and a curse, bestowed upon the dog simultaneously.

Dogs are not generally apt to revenge injuries inflicted upon them by
their masters; but Mr. Sikes's dog, having faults of temper in common
with his owner, and labouring, perhaps, at this moment, under a
powerful sense of injury, made no more ado but at once fixed his teeth
in one of the half-boots.  Having given in a hearty shake, he retired,
growling, under a form; just escaping the pewter measure which Mr.
Sikes levelled at his head.

'You would, would you?' said Sikes, seizing the poker in one hand, and
deliberately opening with the other a large clasp-knife, which he drew
from his pocket.  'Come here, you born devil!  Come here!  D'ye hear?'

The dog no doubt heard; because Mr. Sikes spoke in the very harshest
key of a very harsh voice; but, appearing to entertain some
unaccountable objection to having his throat cut, he remained where he
was, and growled more fiercely than before:  at the same time grasping
the end of the poker between his teeth, and biting at it like a wild
beast.

This resistance only infuriated Mr. Sikes the more; who, dropping on
his knees, began to assail the animal most furiously.  The dog jumped
from right to left, and from left to right; snapping, growling, and
barking; the man thrust and swore, and struck and blasphemed; and the
struggle was reaching a most critical point for one or other; when, the
door suddenly opening, the dog darted out:  leaving Bill Sikes with the
poker and the clasp-knife in his hands.

There must always be two parties to a quarrel, says the old adage.  Mr.
Sikes, being disappointed of the dog's participation, at once
transferred his share in the quarrel to the new comer.

'What the devil do you come in between me and my dog for?' said Sikes,
with a fierce gesture.

'I didn't know, my dear, I didn't know,' replied Fagin, humbly; for the
Jew was the new comer.

'Didn't know, you white-livered thief!' growled Sikes. 'Couldn't you
hear the noise?'

'Not a sound of it, as I'm a living man, Bill,' replied the Jew.

'Oh no!  You hear nothing, you don't,' retorted Sikes with a fierce
sneer.  'Sneaking in and out, so as nobody hears how you come or go!  I
wish you had been the dog, Fagin, half a minute ago.'

'Why?' inquired the Jew with a forced smile.

'Cause the government, as cares for the lives of such men as you, as
haven't half the pluck of curs, lets a man kill a dog how he likes,'
replied Sikes, shutting up the knife with a very expressive look;
'that's why.'

The Jew rubbed his hands; and, sitting down at the table, affected to
laugh at the pleasantry of his friend.  He was obviously very ill at
ease, however.

'Grin away,' said Sikes, replacing the poker, and surveying him with
savage contempt; 'grin away.  You'll never have the laugh at me,
though, unless it's behind a nightcap.  I've got the upper hand over
you, Fagin; and, d--me, I'll keep it.  There!  If I go, you go; so take
care of me.'

'Well, well, my dear,' said the Jew, 'I know all that; we--we--have a
mutual interest, Bill,--a mutual interest.'

'Humph,' said Sikes, as if he thought the interest lay rather more on
the Jew's side than on his.  'Well, what have you got to say to me?'

'It's all passed safe through the melting-pot,' replied Fagin, 'and
this is your share.  It's rather more than it ought to be, my dear; but
as I know you'll do me a good turn another time, and--'

'Stow that gammon,' interposed the robber, impatiently. 'Where is it?
Hand over!'

'Yes, yes, Bill; give me time, give me time,' replied the Jew,
soothingly.  'Here it is!  All safe!'  As he spoke, he drew forth an
old cotton handkerchief from his breast; and untying a large knot in
one corner, produced a small brown-paper packet.  Sikes, snatching it
from him, hastily opened it; and proceeded to count the sovereigns it
contained.

'This is all, is it?' inquired Sikes.

'All,' replied the Jew.

'You haven't opened the parcel and swallowed one or two as you come
along, have you?' inquired Sikes, suspiciously. 'Don't put on an
injured look at the question; you've done it many a time. Jerk the
tinkler.'

These words, in plain English, conveyed an injunction to ring the bell.
It was answered by another Jew:  younger than Fagin, but nearly as vile
and repulsive in appearance.

Bill Sikes merely pointed to the empty measure.  The Jew, perfectly
understanding the hint, retired to fill it:  previously exchanging a
remarkable look with Fagin, who raised his eyes for an instant, as if
in expectation of it, and shook his head in reply; so slightly that the
action would have been almost imperceptible to an observant third
person.  It was lost upon Sikes, who was stooping at the moment to tie
the boot-lace which the dog had torn.  Possibly, if he had observed the
brief interchange of signals, he might have thought that it boded no
good to him.

'Is anybody here, Barney?' inquired Fagin; speaking, now that that
Sikes was looking on, without raising his eyes from the ground.

'Dot a shoul,' replied Barney; whose words:  whether they came from the
heart or not:  made their way through the nose.

'Nobody?' inquired Fagin, in a tone of surprise:  which perhaps might
mean that Barney was at liberty to tell the truth.

'Dobody but Biss Dadsy,' replied Barney.

'Nancy!' exclaimed Sikes.  'Where?  Strike me blind, if I don't honour
that 'ere girl, for her native talents.'

'She's bid havid a plate of boiled beef id the bar,' replied Barney.

'Send her here,' said Sikes, pouring out a glass of liquor. 'Send her
here.'

Barney looked timidly at Fagin, as if for permission; the Jew remaining
silent, and not lifting his eyes from the ground, he retired; and
presently returned, ushering in Nancy; who was decorated with the
bonnet, apron, basket, and street-door key, complete.

'You are on the scent, are you, Nancy?' inquired Sikes, proffering the
glass.

'Yes, I am, Bill,' replied the young lady, disposing of its contents;
'and tired enough of it I am, too.  The young brat's been ill and
confined to the crib; and--'

'Ah, Nancy, dear!' said Fagin, looking up.

Now, whether a peculiar contraction of the Jew's red eye-brows, and a
half closing of his deeply-set eyes, warned Miss Nancy that she was
disposed to be too communicative, is not a matter of much importance.
The fact is all we need care for here; and the fact is, that she
suddenly checked herself, and with several gracious smiles upon Mr.
Sikes, turned the conversation to other matters. In about ten minutes'
time, Mr. Fagin was seized with a fit of coughing; upon which Nancy
pulled her shawl over her shoulders, and declared it was time to go.
Mr. Sikes, finding that he was walking a short part of her way himself,
expressed his intention of accompanying her; they went away together,
followed, at a little distant, by the dog, who slunk out of a back-yard
as soon as his master was out of sight.

The Jew thrust his head out of the room door when Sikes had left it;
looked after him as he walked up the dark passage; shook his clenched
fist; muttered a deep curse; and then, with a horrible grin, reseated
himself at the table; where he was soon deeply absorbed in the
interesting pages of the Hue-and-Cry.

Meanwhile, Oliver Twist, little dreaming that he was within so very
short a distance of the merry old gentleman, was on his way to the
book-stall.  When he got into Clerkenwell, he accidently turned down a
by-street which was not exactly in his way; but not discovering his
mistake until he had got half-way down it, and knowing it must lead in
the right direction, he did not think it worth while to turn back; and
so marched on, as quickly as he could, with the books under his arm.

He was walking along, thinking how happy and contented he ought to
feel; and how much he would give for only one look at poor little Dick,
who, starved and beaten, might be weeping bitterly at that very moment;
when he was startled by a young woman screaming out very loud.  'Oh, my
dear brother!'  And he had hardly looked up, to see what the matter
was, when he was stopped by having a pair of arms thrown tight round
his neck.

'Don't,' cried Oliver, struggling.  'Let go of me.  Who is it? What are
you stopping me for?'

The only reply to this, was a great number of loud lamentations from
the young woman who had embraced him; and who had a little basket and a
street-door key in her hand.

'Oh my gracious!' said the young woman, 'I have found him!  Oh! Oliver!
Oliver!  Oh you naughty boy, to make me suffer such distress on your
account!  Come home, dear, come.  Oh, I've found him.  Thank gracious
goodness heavins, I've found him!'  With these incoherent exclamations,
the young woman burst into another fit of crying, and got so dreadfully
hysterical, that a couple of women who came up at the moment asked a
butcher's boy with a shiny head of hair anointed with suet, who was
also looking on, whether he didn't think he had better run for the
doctor.  To which, the butcher's boy:  who appeared of a lounging, not
to say indolent disposition:  replied, that he thought not.

'Oh, no, no, never mind,' said the young woman, grasping Oliver's hand;
'I'm better now.  Come home directly, you cruel boy! Come!'

'Oh, ma'am,' replied the young woman, 'he ran away, near a month ago,
from his parents, who are hard-working and respectable people; and went
and joined a set of thieves and bad characters; and almost broke his
mother's heart.'

'Young wretch!' said one woman.

'Go home, do, you little brute,' said the other.

'I am not,' replied Oliver, greatly alarmed.  'I don't know her. I
haven't any sister, or father and mother either.  I'm an orphan; I live
at Pentonville.'

'Only hear him, how he braves it out!' cried the young woman.

'Why, it's Nancy!' exclaimed Oliver; who now saw her face for the first
time; and started back, in irrepressible astonishment.

'You see he knows me!' cried Nancy, appealing to the bystanders. 'He
can't help himself.  Make him come home, there's good people, or he'll
kill his dear mother and father, and break my heart!'

'What the devil's this?' said a man, bursting out of a beer-shop, with
a white dog at his heels; 'young Oliver! Come home to your poor mother,
you young dog!  Come home directly.'

'I don't belong to them.  I don't know them.  Help! help!' cried
Oliver, struggling in the man's powerful grasp.

'Help!' repeated the man.  'Yes; I'll help you, you young rascal!

What books are these?  You've been a stealing 'em, have you? Give 'em
here.'  With these words, the man tore the volumes from his grasp, and
struck him on the head.

'That's right!' cried a looker-on, from a garret-window. 'That's the
only way of bringing him to his senses!'

'To be sure!' cried a sleepy-faced carpenter, casting an approving look
at the garret-window.

'It'll do him good!' said the two women.

'And he shall have it, too!' rejoined the man, administering another
blow, and seizing Oliver by the collar.  'Come on, you young villain!
Here, Bull's-eye, mind him, boy!  Mind him!'

Weak with recent illness; stupified by the blows and the suddenness of
the attack; terrified by the fierce growling of the dog, and the
brutality of the man; overpowered by the conviction of the bystanders
that he really was the hardened little wretch he was described to be;
what could one poor child do!  Darkness had set in; it was a low
neighborhood; no help was near; resistance was useless.  In another
moment he was dragged into a labyrinth of dark narrow courts, and was
forced along them at a pace which rendered the few cries he dared to
give utterance to, unintelligible.  It was of little moment, indeed,
whether they were intelligible or no; for there was nobody to care for
them, had they been ever so plain.


      *      *      *      *      *

The gas-lamps were lighted; Mrs. Bedwin was waiting anxiously at the
open door; the servant had run up the street twenty times to see if
there were any traces of Oliver; and still the two old gentlemen sat,
perseveringly, in the dark parlour, with the watch between them.



CHAPTER XVI

RELATES WHAT BECAME OF OLIVER TWIST, AFTER HE HAD BEEN CLAIMED BY NANCY

The narrow streets and courts, at length, terminated in a large open
space; scattered about which, were pens for beasts, and other
indications of a cattle-market.  Sikes slackened his pace when they
reached this spot:  the girl being quite unable to support any longer,
the rapid rate at which they had hitherto walked.  Turning to Oliver,
he roughly commanded him to take hold of Nancy's hand.

'Do you hear?' growled Sikes, as Oliver hesitated, and looked round.

They were in a dark corner, quite out of the track of passengers.

Oliver saw, but too plainly, that resistance would be of no avail.  He
held out his hand, which Nancy clasped tight in hers.

'Give me the other,' said Sikes, seizing Oliver's unoccupied hand.
'Here, Bull's-Eye!'

The dog looked up, and growled.

'See here, boy!' said Sikes, putting his other hand to Oliver's throat;
'if he speaks ever so soft a word, hold him!  D'ye mind!'

The dog growled again; and licking his lips, eyed Oliver as if he were
anxious to attach himself to his windpipe without delay.

'He's as willing as a Christian, strike me blind if he isn't!' said
Sikes, regarding the animal with a kind of grim and ferocious approval.
'Now, you know what you've got to expect, master, so call away as quick
as you like; the dog will soon stop that game.  Get on, young'un!'

Bull's-eye wagged his tail in acknowledgment of this unusually
endearing form of speech; and, giving vent to another admonitory growl
for the benefit of Oliver, led the way onward.

It was Smithfield that they were crossing, although it might have been
Grosvenor Square, for anything Oliver knew to the contrary. The night
was dark and foggy.  The lights in the shops could scarecely struggle
through the heavy mist, which thickened every moment and shrouded the
streets and houses in gloom; rendering the strange place still stranger
in Oliver's eyes; and making his uncertainty the more dismal and
depressing.

They had hurried on a few paces, when a deep church-bell struck the
hour.  With its first stroke, his two conductors stopped, and turned
their heads in the direction whence the sound proceeded.

'Eight o' clock, Bill,' said Nancy, when the bell ceased.

'What's the good of telling me that; I can hear it, can't I!' replied
Sikes.

'I wonder whether THEY can hear it,' said Nancy.

'Of course they can,' replied Sikes.  'It was Bartlemy time when I was
shopped; and there warn't a penny trumpet in the fair, as I couldn't
hear the squeaking on.  Arter I was locked up for the night, the row
and din outside made the thundering old jail so silent, that I could
almost have beat my brains out against the iron plates of the door.'

'Poor fellow!' said Nancy, who still had her face turned towards the
quarter in which the bell had sounded.  'Oh, Bill, such fine young
chaps as them!'

'Yes; that's all you women think of,' answered Sikes.  'Fine young
chaps!  Well, they're as good as dead, so it don't much matter.'

With this consolation, Mr. Sikes appeared to repress a rising tendency
to jealousy, and, clasping Oliver's wrist more firmly, told him to step
out again.

'Wait a minute!' said the girl:  'I wouldn't hurry by, if it was you
that was coming out to be hung, the next time eight o'clock struck,
Bill.  I'd walk round and round the place till I dropped, if the snow
was on the ground, and I hadn't a shawl to cover me.'

'And what good would that do?' inquired the unsentimental Mr. Sikes.
'Unless you could pitch over a file and twenty yards of good stout
rope, you might as well be walking fifty mile off, or not walking at
all, for all the good it would do me.  Come on, and don't stand
preaching there.'

The girl burst into a laugh; drew her shawl more closely round her; and
they walked away.  But Oliver felt her hand tremble, and, looking up in
her face as they passed a gas-lamp, saw that it had turned a deadly
white.

They walked on, by little-frequented and dirty ways, for a full
half-hour:  meeting very few people, and those appearing from their
looks to hold much the same position in society as Mr. Sikes himself.
At length they turned into a very filthy narrow street, nearly full of
old-clothes shops; the dog running forward, as if conscious that there
was no further occasion for his keeping on guard, stopped before the
door of a shop that was closed and apparently untenanted; the house was
in a ruinous condition, and on the door was nailed a board, intimating
that it was to let:  which looked as if it had hung there for many
years.

'All right,' cried Sikes, glancing cautiously about.

Nancy stooped below the shutters, and Oliver heard the sound of a bell.
They crossed to the opposite side of the street, and stood for a few
moments under a lamp.  A noise, as if a sash window were gently raised,
was heard; and soon afterwards the door softly opened.  Mr. Sikes then
seized the terrified boy by the collar with very little ceremony; and
all three were quickly inside the house.

The passage was perfectly dark.  They waited, while the person who had
let them in, chained and barred the door.

'Anybody here?' inquired Sikes.

'No,' replied a voice, which Oliver thought he had heard before.

'Is the old 'un here?' asked the robber.

'Yes,' replied the voice, 'and precious down in the mouth he has been.
Won't he be glad to see you?  Oh, no!'

The style of this reply, as well as the voice which delivered it,
seemed familiar to Oliver's ears:  but it was impossible to distinguish
even the form of the speaker in the darkness.

'Let's have a glim,' said Sikes, 'or we shall go breaking our necks, or
treading on the dog.  Look after your legs if you do!'

'Stand still a moment, and I'll get you one,' replied the voice. The
receding footsteps of the speaker were heard; and, in another minute,
the form of Mr. John Dawkins, otherwise the Artful Dodger, appeared.
He bore in his right hand a tallow candle stuck in the end of a cleft
stick.

The young gentleman did not stop to bestow any other mark of
recognition upon Oliver than a humourous grin; but, turning away,
beckoned the visitors to follow him down a flight of stairs. They
crossed an empty kitchen; and, opening the door of a low
earthy-smelling room, which seemed to have been built in a small
back-yard, were received with a shout of laughter.

'Oh, my wig, my wig!' cried Master Charles Bates, from whose lungs the
laughter had proceeded:  'here he is! oh, cry, here he is!  Oh, Fagin,
look at him!  Fagin, do look at him! I can't bear it; it is such a
jolly game, I cant' bear it.  Hold me, somebody, while I laugh it out.'

With this irrepressible ebullition of mirth, Master Bates laid himself
flat on the floor: and kicked convulsively for five minutes, in an
ectasy of facetious joy.  Then jumping to his feet, he snatched the
cleft stick from the Dodger; and, advancing to Oliver, viewed him round
and round; while the Jew, taking off his nightcap, made a great number
of low bows to the bewildered boy.  The Artful, meantime, who was of a
rather saturnine disposition, and seldom gave way to merriment when it
interfered with business, rifled Oliver's pockets with steady assiduity.

'Look at his togs, Fagin!' said Charley, putting the light so close to
his new jacket as nearly to set him on fire.  'Look at his togs!
Superfine cloth, and the heavy swell cut!  Oh, my eye, what a game!
And his books, too!  Nothing but a gentleman, Fagin!'

'Delighted to see you looking so well, my dear,' said the Jew, bowing
with mock humility.  'The Artful shall give you another suit, my dear,
for fear you should spoil that Sunday one.  Why didn't you write, my
dear, and say you were coming?  We'd have got something warm for
supper.'

At his, Master Bates roared again: so loud, that Fagin himself relaxed,
and even the Dodger smiled; but as the Artful drew forth the five-pound
note at that instant, it is doubtful whether the sally of the discovery
awakened his merriment.

'Hallo, what's that?' inquired Sikes, stepping forward as the Jew
seized the note.  'That's mine, Fagin.'

'No, no, my dear,' said the Jew.  'Mine, Bill, mine.  You shall have
the books.'

'If that ain't mine!' said Bill Sikes, putting on his hat with a
determined air; 'mine and Nancy's that is; I'll take the boy back
again.'

The Jew started.  Oliver started too, though from a very different
cause; for he hoped that the dispute might really end in his being
taken back.

'Come!  Hand over, will you?' said Sikes.

'This is hardly fair, Bill; hardly fair, is it, Nancy?' inquired the
Jew.

'Fair, or not fair,' retorted Sikes, 'hand over, I tell you! Do you
think Nancy and me has got nothing else to do with our precious time
but to spend it in scouting arter, and kidnapping, every young boy as
gets grabbed through you?  Give it here, you avaricious old skeleton,
give it here!'

With this gentle remonstrance, Mr. Sikes plucked the note from between
the Jew's finger and thumb; and looking the old man coolly in the face,
folded it up small, and tied it in his neckerchief.

'That's for our share of the trouble,' said Sikes; 'and not half
enough, neither.  You may keep the books, if you're fond of reading.
If you ain't, sell 'em.'

'They're very pretty,' said Charley Bates: who, with sundry grimaces,
had been affecting to read one of the volumes in question; 'beautiful
writing, isn't is, Oliver?'  At sight of the dismayed look with which
Oliver regarded his tormentors, Master Bates, who was blessed with a
lively sense of the ludicrous, fell into another ectasy, more
boisterous than the first.

'They belong to the old gentleman,' said Oliver, wringing his hands;
'to the good, kind, old gentleman who took me into his house, and had
me nursed, when I was near dying of the fever. Oh, pray send them back;
send him back the books and money.  Keep me here all my life long; but
pray, pray send them back.  He'll think I stole them; the old lady:
all of them who were so kind to me: will think I stole them.  Oh, do
have mercy upon me, and send them back!'

With these words, which were uttered with all the energy of passionate
grief, Oliver fell upon his knees at the Jew's feet; and beat his hands
together, in perfect desperation.

'The boy's right,' remarked Fagin, looking covertly round, and knitting
his shaggy eyebrows into a hard knot.  'You're right, Oliver, you're
right; they WILL think you have stolen 'em.  Ha! ha!' chuckled the Jew,
rubbing his hands, 'it couldn't have happened better, if we had chosen
our time!'

'Of course it couldn't,' replied Sikes; 'I know'd that, directly I see
him coming through Clerkenwell, with the books under his arm.  It's all
right enough.  They're soft-hearted psalm-singers, or they wouldn't
have taken him in at all; and they'll ask no questions after him, fear
they should be obliged to prosecute, and so get him lagged.  He's safe
enough.'

Oliver had looked from one to the other, while these words were being
spoken, as if he were bewildered, and could scarecely understand what
passed; but when Bill Sikes concluded, he jumped suddenly to his feet,
and tore wildly from the room:  uttering shrieks for help, which made
the bare old house echo to the roof.

'Keep back the dog, Bill!' cried Nancy, springing before the door, and
closing it, as the Jew and his two pupils darted out in pursuit.  'Keep
back the dog; he'll tear the boy to pieces.'

'Serve him right!' cried Sikes, struggling to disengage himself from
the girl's grasp.  'Stand off from me, or I'll split your head against
the wall.'

'I don't care for that, Bill, I don't care for that,' screamed the
girl, struggling violently with the man, 'the child shan't be torn down
by the dog, unless you kill me first.'

'Shan't he!' said Sikes, setting his teeth.  'I'll soon do that, if you
don't keep off.'

The housebreaker flung the girl from him to the further end of the
room, just as the Jew and the two boys returned, dragging Oliver among
them.

'What's the matter here!' said Fagin, looking round.

'The girl's gone mad, I think,' replied Sikes, savagely.

'No, she hasn't,' said Nancy, pale and breathless from the scuffle;
'no, she hasn't, Fagin; don't think it.'

'Then keep quiet, will you?' said the Jew, with a threatening look.

'No, I won't do that, neither,' replied Nancy, speaking very loud.
'Come!  What do you think of that?'

Mr. Fagin was sufficiently well acquainted with the manners and customs
of that particular species of humanity to which Nancy belonged, to feel
tolerably certain that it would be rather unsafe to prolong any
conversation with her, at present.  With the view of diverting the
attention of the company, he turned to Oliver.

'So you wanted to get away, my dear, did you?' said the Jew, taking up
a jagged and knotted club which law in a corner of the fireplace; 'eh?'

Oliver made no reply.  But he watched the Jew's motions, and breathed
quickly.

'Wanted to get assistance; called for the police; did you?' sneered the
Jew, catching the boy by the arm.  'We'll cure you of that, my young
master.'

The Jew inflicted a smart blow on Oliver's shoulders with the club; and
was raising it for a second, when the girl, rushing forward, wrested it
from his hand.  She flung it into the fire, with a force that brought
some of the glowing coals whirling out into the room.

'I won't stand by and see it done, Fagin,' cried the girl. 'You've got
the boy, and what more would you have?--Let him be--let him be--or I
shall put that mark on some of you, that will bring me to the gallows
before my time.'

The girl stamped her foot violently on the floor as she vented this
threat; and with her lips compressed, and her hands clenched, looked
alternately at the Jew and the other robber: her face quite colourless
from the passion of rage into which she had gradually worked herself.

'Why, Nancy!' said the Jew, in a soothing tone; after a pause, during
which he and Mr. Sikes had stared at one another in a disconcerted
manner; 'you,--you're more clever than ever to-night.  Ha! ha! my dear,
you are acting beautifully.'

'Am I!' said the girl.  'Take care I don't overdo it.  You will be the
worse for it, Fagin, if I do; and so I tell you in good time to keep
clear of me.'

There is something about a roused woman: especially if she add to all
her other strong passions, the fierce impulses of recklessness and
despair; which few men like to provoke. The Jew saw that it would be
hopeless to affect any further mistake regarding the reality of Miss
Nancy's rage; and, shrinking involuntarily back a few paces, cast a
glance, half imploring and half cowardly, at Sikes: as if to hint that
he was the fittest person to pursue the dialogue.

Mr. Sikes, thus mutely appealed to; and possibly feeling his personal
pride and influence interested in the immediate reduction of Miss Nancy
to reason; gave utterance to about a couple of score of curses and
threats, the rapid production of which reflected great credit on the
fertility of his invention. As they produced no visible effect on the
object against whom they were discharged, however, he resorted to more
tangible arguments.

'What do you mean by this?' said Sikes; backing the inquiry with a very
common imprecation concerning the most beautiful of human features:
which, if it were heard above, only once out of every fifty thousand
times that it is uttered below, would render blindness as common a
disorder as measles: 'what do you mean by it?  Burn my body!  Do you
know who you are, and what you are?'

'Oh, yes, I know all about it,' replied the girl, laughing
hysterically; and shaking her head from side to side, with a poor
assumption of indifference.

'Well, then, keep quiet,' rejoined Sikes, with a growl like that he was
accustomed to use when addressing his dog, 'or I'll quiet you for a
good long time to come.'

The girl laughed again: even less composedly than before; and, darting
a hasty look at Sikes, turned her face aside, and bit her lip till the
blood came.

'You're a nice one,' added Sikes, as he surveyed her with a
contemptuous air, 'to take up the humane and gen--teel side!  A pretty
subject for the child, as you call him, to make a friend of!'

'God Almighty help me, I am!' cried the girl passionately; 'and I wish
I had been struck dead in the street, or had changed places with them
we passed so near to-night, before I had lent a hand in bringing him
here.  He's a thief, a liar, a devil, all that's bad, from this night
forth.  Isn't that enough for the old wretch, without blows?'

'Come, come, Sikes,' said the Jew appealing to him in a remonstratory
tone, and motioning towards the boys, who were eagerly attentive to all
that passed; 'we must have civil words; civil words, Bill.'

'Civil words!' cried the girl, whose passion was frightful to see.
'Civil words, you villain!  Yes, you deserve 'em from me. I thieved for
you when I was a child not half as old as this!' pointing to Oliver.
'I have been in the same trade, and in the same service, for twelve
years since.  Don't you know it?  Speak out!  Don't you know it?'

'Well, well,' replied the Jew, with an attempt at pacification; 'and,
if you have, it's your living!'

'Aye, it is!' returned the girl; not speaking, but pouring out the
words in one continuous and vehement scream.  'It is my living; and the
cold, wet, dirty streets are my home; and you're the wretch that drove
me to them long ago, and that'll keep me there, day and night, day and
night, till I die!'

'I shall do you a mischief!' interposed the Jew, goaded by these
reproaches; 'a mischief worse than that, if you say much more!'

The girl said nothing more; but, tearing her hair and dress in a
transport of passion, made such a rush at the Jew as would probably
have left signal marks of her revenge upon him, had not her wrists been
seized by Sikes at the right moment; upon which, she made a few
ineffectual struggles, and fainted.

'She's all right now,' said Sikes, laying her down in a corner. 'She's
uncommon strong in the arms, when she's up in this way.'

The Jew wiped his forehead: and smiled, as if it were a relief to have
the disturbance over; but neither he, nor Sikes, nor the dog, nor the
boys, seemed to consider it in any other light than a common occurance
incidental to business.

'It's the worst of having to do with women,' said the Jew, replacing
his club; 'but they're clever, and we can't get on, in our line,
without 'em.  Charley, show Oliver to bed.'

'I suppose he'd better not wear his best clothes tomorrow, Fagin, had
he?' inquired Charley Bates.

'Certainly not,' replied the Jew, reciprocating the grin with which
Charley put the question.

Master Bates, apparently much delighted with his commission, took the
cleft stick: and led Oliver into an adjacent kitchen, where there were
two or three of the beds on which he had slept before; and here, with
many uncontrollable bursts of laughter, he produced the identical old
suit of clothes which Oliver had so much congratulated himself upon
leaving off at Mr. Brownlow's; and the accidental display of which, to
Fagin, by the Jew who purchased them, had been the very first clue
received, of his whereabout.

'Put off the smart ones,' said Charley, 'and I'll give 'em to Fagin to
take care of.  What fun it is!'

Poor Oliver unwillingly complied.  Master Bates rolling up the new
clothes under his arm, departed from the room, leaving Oliver in the
dark, and locking the door behind him.

The noise of Charley's laughter, and the voice of Miss Betsy, who
opportunely arrived to throw water over her friend, and perform other
feminine offices for the promotion of her recovery, might have kept
many people awake under more happy circumstances than those in which
Oliver was placed.  But he was sick and weary; and he soon fell sound
asleep.



CHAPTER XVII

OLIVER'S DESTINY CONTINUING UNPROPITIOUS, BRINGS A GREAT MAN TO LONDON
TO INJURE HIS REPUTATION

It is the custom on the stage, in all good murderous melodramas, to
present the tragic and the comic scenes, in as regular alternation, as
the layers of red and white in a side of streaky bacon.  The hero sinks
upon his straw bed, weighed down by fetters and misfortunes; in the
next scene, his faithful but unconscious squire regales the audience
with a comic song.  We behold, with throbbing bosoms, the heroine in
the grasp of a proud and ruthless baron: her virtue and her life alike
in danger, drawing forth her dagger to preserve the one at the cost of
the other; and just as our expectations are wrought up to the highest
pitch, a whistle is heard, and we are straightway transported to the
great hall of the castle; where a grey-headed seneschal sings a funny
chorus with a funnier body of vassals, who are free of all sorts of
places, from church vaults to palaces, and roam about in company,
carolling perpetually.

Such changes appear absurd; but they are not so unnatural as they would
seem at first sight.  The transitions in real life from well-spread
boards to death-beds, and from mourning-weeds to holiday garments, are
not a whit less startling; only, there, we are busy actors, instead of
passive lookers-on, which makes a vast difference.  The actors in the
mimic life of the theatre, are blind to violent transitions and abrupt
impulses of passion or feeling, which, presented before the eyes of
mere spectators, are at once condemned as outrageous and preposterous.

As sudden shiftings of the scene, and rapid changes of time and place,
are not only sanctioned in books by long usage, but are by many
considered as the great art of authorship: an author's skill in his
craft being, by such critics, chiefly estimated with relation to the
dilemmas in which he leaves his characters at the end of every chapter:
this brief introduction to the present one may perhaps be deemed
unnecessary.  If so, let it be considered a delicate intimation on the
part of the historian that he is going back to the town in which Oliver
Twist was born; the reader taking it for granted that there are good
and substantial reasons for making the journey, or he would not be
invited to proceed upon such an expedition.

Mr. Bumble emerged at early morning from the workhouse-gate, and walked
with portly carriage and commanding steps, up the High Street.  He was
in the full bloom and pride of beadlehood; his cocked hat and coat were
dazzling in the morning sun; he clutched his cane with the vigorous
tenacity of health and power.  Mr. Bumble always carried his head high;
but this morning it was higher than usual.  There was an abstraction in
his eye, an elevation in his air, which might have warned an observant
stranger that thoughts were passing in the beadle's mind, too great for
utterance.

Mr. Bumble stopped not to converse with the small shopkeepers and
others who spoke to him, deferentially, as he passed along.  He merely
returned their salutations with a wave of his hand, and relaxed not in
his dignified pace, until he reached the farm where Mrs. Mann tended
the infant paupers with parochial care.

'Drat that beadle!' said Mrs. Mann, hearing the well-known shaking at
the garden-gate.  'If it isn't him at this time in the morning!  Lauk,
Mr. Bumble, only think of its being you!  Well, dear me, it IS a
pleasure, this is!  Come into the parlour, sir, please.'

The first sentence was addressed to Susan; and the exclamations of
delight were uttered to Mr. Bumble: as the good lady unlocked the
garden-gate: and showed him, with great attention and respect, into the
house.

'Mrs. Mann,' said Mr. Bumble; not sitting upon, or dropping himself
into a seat, as any common jackanapes would: but letting himself
gradually and slowly down into a chair; 'Mrs. Mann, ma'am, good
morning.'

'Well, and good morning to _you_, sir,' replied Mrs. Mann, with many
smiles; 'and hoping you find yourself well, sir!'

'So-so, Mrs. Mann,' replied the beadle.  'A porochial life is not a bed
of roses, Mrs. Mann.'

'Ah, that it isn't indeed, Mr. Bumble,' rejoined the lady. And all the
infant paupers might have chorussed the rejoinder with great propriety,
if they had heard it.

'A porochial life, ma'am,' continued Mr. Bumble, striking the table
with his cane, 'is a life of worrit, and vexation, and hardihood; but
all public characters, as I may say, must suffer prosecution.'

Mrs. Mann, not very well knowing what the beadle meant, raised her
hands with a look of sympathy, and sighed.

'Ah!  You may well sigh, Mrs. Mann!' said the beadle.

Finding she had done right, Mrs. Mann sighed again:  evidently to the
satisfaction of the public character:  who, repressing a complacent
smile by looking sternly at his cocked hat, said,

'Mrs. Mann, I am going to London.'

'Lauk, Mr. Bumble!' cried Mrs. Mann, starting back.

'To London, ma'am,' resumed the inflexible beadle, 'by coach.  I and
two paupers, Mrs. Mann!  A legal action is a coming on, about a
settlement; and the board has appointed me--me, Mrs. Mann--to dispose
to the matter before the quarter-sessions at Clerkinwell.

And I very much question,' added Mr. Bumble, drawing himself up,
'whether the Clerkinwell Sessions will not find themselves in the wrong
box before they have done with me.'

'Oh! you mustn't be too hard upon them, sir,' said Mrs. Mann, coaxingly.

'The Clerkinwell Sessions have brought it upon themselves, ma'am,'
replied Mr. Bumble; 'and if the Clerkinwell Sessions find that they
come off rather worse than they expected, the Clerkinwell Sessions have
only themselves to thank.'

There was so much determination and depth of purpose about the menacing
manner in which Mr. Bumble delivered himself of these words, that Mrs.
Mann appeared quite awed by them. At length she said,

'You're going by coach, sir?  I thought it was always usual to send
them paupers in carts.'

'That's when they're ill, Mrs. Mann,' said the beadle.  'We put the
sick paupers into open carts in the rainy weather, to prevent their
taking cold.'

'Oh!' said Mrs. Mann.

'The opposition coach contracts for these two; and takes them cheap,'
said Mr. Bumble.  'They are both in a very low state, and we find it
would come two pound cheaper to move 'em than to bury 'em--that is, if
we can throw 'em upon another parish, which I think we shall be able to
do, if they don't die upon the road to spite us.  Ha! ha! ha!'

When Mr. Bumble had laughed a little while, his eyes again encountered
the cocked hat; and he became grave.

'We are forgetting business, ma'am,' said the beadle; 'here is your
porochial stipend for the month.'

Mr. Bumble produced some silver money rolled up in paper, from his
pocket-book; and requested a receipt:  which Mrs. Mann wrote.

'It's very much blotted, sir,' said the farmer of infants; 'but it's
formal enough, I dare say.  Thank you, Mr. Bumble, sir, I am very much
obliged to you, I'm sure.'

Mr. Bumble nodded, blandly, in acknowledgment of Mrs. Mann's curtsey;
and inquired how the children were.

'Bless their dear little hearts!' said Mrs. Mann with emotion, 'they're
as well as can be, the dears!  Of course, except the two that died last
week.  And little Dick.'

'Isn't that boy no better?' inquired Mr. Bumble.

Mrs. Mann shook her head.

'He's a ill-conditioned, wicious, bad-disposed porochial child that,'
said Mr. Bumble angrily.  'Where is he?'

'I'll bring him to you in one minute, sir,' replied Mrs. Mann. 'Here,
you Dick!'

After some calling, Dick was discovered.  Having had his face put under
the pump, and dried upon Mrs. Mann's gown, he was led into the awful
presence of Mr. Bumble, the beadle.

The child was pale and thin; his cheeks were sunken; and his eyes large
and bright.  The scanty parish dress, the livery of his misery, hung
loosely on his feeble body; and his young limbs had wasted away, like
those of an old man.

Such was the little being who stood trembling beneath Mr. Bumble's
glance; not daring to lift his eyes from the floor; and dreading even
to hear the beadle's voice.

'Can't you look at the gentleman, you obstinate boy?' said Mrs. Mann.

The child meekly raised his eyes, and encountered those of Mr. Bumble.

'What's the matter with you, porochial Dick?' inquired Mr. Bumble, with
well-timed jocularity.

'Nothing, sir,' replied the child faintly.

'I should think not,' said Mrs. Mann, who had of course laughed very
much at Mr. Bumble's humour.

'You want for nothing, I'm sure.'

'I should like--' faltered the child.

'Hey-day!' interposed Mr. Mann, 'I suppose you're going to say that you
DO want for something, now?  Why, you little wretch--'

'Stop, Mrs. Mann, stop!' said the beadle, raising his hand with a show
of authority.  'Like what, sir, eh?'

'I should like,' faltered the child, 'if somebody that can write, would
put a few words down for me on a piece of paper, and fold it up and
seal it, and keep it for me, after I am laid in the ground.'

'Why, what does the boy mean?' exclaimed Mr. Bumble, on whom the
earnest manner and wan aspect of the child had made some impression:
accustomed as he was to such things.  'What do you mean, sir?'

'I should like,' said the child, 'to leave my dear love to poor Oliver
Twist; and to let him know how often I have sat by myself and cried to
think of his wandering about in the dark nights with nobody to help
him.  And I should like to tell him,' said the child pressing his small
hands together, and speaking with great fervour, 'that I was glad to
die when I was very young; for, perhaps, if I had lived to be a man,
and had grown old, my little sister who is in Heaven, might forget me,
or be unlike me; and it would be so much happier if we were both
children there together.'

Mr. Bumble surveyed the little speaker, from head to foot, with
indescribable astonishment; and, turning to his companion, said,
'They're all in one story, Mrs. Mann.  That out-dacious Oliver had
demogalized them all!'

'I couldn't have believed it, sir' said Mrs Mann, holding up her hands,
and looking malignantly at Dick.  'I never see such a hardened little
wretch!'

'Take him away, ma'am!' said Mr. Bumble imperiously.  'This must be
stated to the board, Mrs. Mann.

'I hope the gentleman will understand that it isn't my fault, sir?'
said Mrs. Mann, whimpering pathetically.

'They shall understand that, ma'am; they shall be acquainted with the
true state of the case,' said Mr. Bumble.  'There; take him away, I
can't bear the sight on him.'

Dick was immediately taken away, and locked up in the coal-cellar.  Mr.
Bumble shortly afterwards took himself off, to prepare for his journey.

At six o'clock next morning, Mr. Bumble:  having exchanged his cocked
hat for a round one, and encased his person in a blue great-coat with a
cape to it:  took his place on the outside of the coach, accompanied by
the criminals whose settlement was disputed; with whom, in due course
of time, he arrived in London.

He experienced no other crosses on the way, than those which originated
in the perverse behaviour of the two paupers, who persisted in
shivering, and complaining of the cold, in a manner which, Mr. Bumble
declared, caused his teeth to chatter in his head, and made him feel
quite uncomfortable; although he had a great-coat on.

Having disposed of these evil-minded persons for the night, Mr. Bumble
sat himself down in the house at which the coach stopped; and took a
temperate dinner of steaks, oyster sauce, and porter. Putting a glass
of hot gin-and-water on the chimney-piece, he drew his chair to the
fire; and, with sundry moral reflections on the too-prevalent sin of
discontent and complaining, composed himself to read the paper.

The very first paragraph upon which Mr. Bumble's eye rested, was the
following advertisement.

                 'FIVE GUINEAS REWARD

'Whereas a young boy, named Oliver Twist, absconded, or was enticed, on
Thursday evening last, from his home, at Pentonville; and has not since
been heard of.  The above reward will be paid to any person who will
give such information as will lead to the discovery of the said Oliver
Twist, or tend to throw any light upon his previous history, in which
the advertiser is, for many reasons, warmly interested.'

And then followed a full description of Oliver's dress, person,
appearance, and disappearance:  with the name and address of Mr.
Brownlow at full length.

Mr. Bumble opened his eyes; read the advertisement, slowly and
carefully, three several times; and in something more than five minutes
was on his way to Pentonville: having actually, in his excitement, left
the glass of hot gin-and-water, untasted.

'Is Mr. Brownlow at home?' inquired Mr. Bumble of the girl who opened
the door.

To this inquiry the girl returned the not uncommon, but rather evasive
reply of 'I don't know; where do you come from?'

Mr. Bumble no sooner uttered Oliver's name, in explanation of his
errand, than Mrs. Bedwin, who had been listening at the parlour door,
hastened into the passage in a breathless state.

'Come in, come in,' said the old lady: 'I knew we should hear of him.
Poor dear!  I knew we should!  I was certain of it.  Bless his heart!
I said so all along.'

Having heard this, the worthy old lady hurried back into the parlour
again; and seating herself on a sofa, burst into tears. The girl, who
was not quite so susceptible, had run upstairs meanwhile; and now
returned with a request that Mr. Bumble would follow her immediately:
which he did.

He was shown into the little back study, where sat Mr. Brownlow and his
friend Mr. Grimwig, with decanters and glasses before them.  The latter
gentleman at once burst into the exclamation:

'A beadle.  A parish beadle, or I'll eat my head.'

'Pray don't interrupt just now,' said Mr. Brownlow.  'Take a seat, will
you?'

Mr. Bumble sat himself down; quite confounded by the oddity of Mr.
Grimwig's manner.  Mr. Brownlow moved the lamp, so as to obtain an
uninterrupted view of the beadle's countenance; and said, with a little
impatience,

'Now, sir, you come in consequence of having seen the advertisement?'

'Yes, sir,' said Mr. Bumble.

'And you ARE a beadle, are you not?' inquired Mr. Grimwig.

'I am a porochial beadle, gentlemen,' rejoined Mr. Bumble proudly.

'Of course,' observed Mr. Grimwig aside to his friend, 'I knew he was.
A beadle all over!'

Mr. Brownlow gently shook his head to impose silence on his friend, and
resumed:

'Do you know where this poor boy is now?'

'No more than nobody,' replied Mr. Bumble.

'Well, what DO you know of him?' inquired the old gentleman. 'Speak
out, my friend, if you have anything to say.  What DO you know of him?'

'You don't happen to know any good of him, do you?' said Mr. Grimwig,
caustically; after an attentive perusal of Mr. Bumble's features.

Mr. Bumble, catching at the inquiry very quickly, shook his head with
portentous solemnity.

'You see?' said Mr. Grimwig, looking triumphantly at Mr. Brownlow.

Mr. Brownlow looked apprehensively at Mr. Bumble's pursed-up
countenance; and requested him to communicate what he knew regarding
Oliver, in as few words as possible.

Mr. Bumble put down his hat; unbuttoned his coat; folded his arms;
inclined his head in a retrospective manner; and, after a few moments'
reflection, commenced his story.

It would be tedious if given in the beadle's words:  occupying, as it
did, some twenty minutes in the telling; but the sum and substance of
it was, that Oliver was a foundling, born of low and vicious parents.
That he had, from his birth, displayed no better qualities than
treachery, ingratitude, and malice.  That he had terminated his brief
career in the place of his birth, by making a sanguinary and cowardly
attack on an unoffending lad, and running away in the night-time from
his master's house.  In proof of his really being the person he
represented himself, Mr. Bumble laid upon the table the papers he had
brought to town. Folding his arms again, he then awaited Mr. Brownlow's
observations.

'I fear it is all too true,' said the old gentleman sorrowfully, after
looking over the papers.  'This is not much for your intelligence; but
I would gladly have given you treble the money, if it had been
favourable to the boy.'

It is not improbable that if Mr. Bumble had been possessed of this
information at an earlier period of the interview, he might have
imparted a very different colouring to his little history. It was too
late to do it now, however; so he shook his head gravely, and,
pocketing the five guineas, withdrew.

Mr. Brownlow paced the room to and fro for some minutes; evidently so
much disturbed by the beadle's tale, that even Mr. Grimwig forbore to
vex him further.

At length he stopped, and rang the bell violently.

'Mrs. Bedwin,' said Mr. Brownlow, when the housekeeper appeared; 'that
boy, Oliver, is an imposter.'

'It can't be, sir.  It cannot be,' said the old lady energetically.

'I tell you he is,' retorted the old gentleman.  'What do you mean by
can't be?  We have just heard a full account of him from his birth; and
he has been a thorough-paced little villain, all his life.'

'I never will believe it, sir,' replied the old lady, firmly. 'Never!'

'You old women never believe anything but quack-doctors, and lying
story-books,' growled Mr. Grimwig.  'I knew it all along. Why didn't
you take my advise in the beginning; you would if he hadn't had a
fever, I suppose, eh?  He was interesting, wasn't he?  Interesting!
Bah!'  And Mr. Grimwig poked the fire with a flourish.

'He was a dear, grateful, gentle child, sir,' retorted Mrs. Bedwin,
indignantly.  'I know what children are, sir; and have done these forty
years; and people who can't say the same, shouldn't say anything about
them.  That's my opinion!'

This was a hard hit at Mr. Grimwig, who was a bachelor.  As it extorted
nothing from that gentleman but a smile, the old lady tossed her head,
and smoothed down her apron preparatory to another speech, when she was
stopped by Mr. Brownlow.

'Silence!' said the old gentleman, feigning an anger he was far from
feeling.  'Never let me hear the boy's name again.  I rang to tell you
that.  Never.  Never, on any pretence, mind!  You may leave the room,
Mrs. Bedwin.  Remember!  I am in earnest.'

There were sad hearts at Mr. Brownlow's that night.

Oliver's heart sank within him, when he thought of his good friends; it
was well for him that he could not know what they had heard, or it
might have broken outright.



CHAPTER XVIII

HOW OLIVER PASSED HIS TIME IN THE IMPROVING SOCIETY OF HIS REPUTABLE
FRIENDS

About noon next day, when the Dodger and Master Bates had gone out to
pursue their customary avocations, Mr. Fagin took the opportunity of
reading Oliver a long lecture on the crying sin of ingratitude; of
which he clearly demonstrated he had been guilty, to no ordinary
extent, in wilfully absenting himself from the society of his anxious
friends; and, still more, in endeavouring to escape from them after so
much trouble and expense had been incurred in his recovery. Mr. Fagin
laid great stress on the fact of his having taken Oliver in, and
cherished him, when, without his timely aid, he might have perished
with hunger; and he related the dismal and affecting history of a young
lad whom, in his philanthropy, he had succoured under parallel
circumstances, but who, proving unworthy of his confidence and evincing
a desire to communicate with the police, had unfortunately come to be
hanged at the Old Bailey one morning.  Mr. Fagin did not seek to
conceal his share in the catastrophe, but lamented with tears in his
eyes that the wrong-headed and treacherous behaviour of the young
person in question, had rendered it necessary that he should become the
victim of certain evidence for the crown: which, if it were not
precisely true, was indispensably necessary for the safety of him (Mr.
Fagin) and a few select friends.  Mr. Fagin concluded by drawing a
rather disagreeable picture of the discomforts of hanging; and, with
great friendliness and politeness of manner, expressed his anxious
hopes that he might never be obliged to submit Oliver Twist to that
unpleasant operation.

Little Oliver's blood ran cold, as he listened to the Jew's words, and
imperfectly comprehended the dark threats conveyed in them.  That it
was possible even for justice itself to confound the innocent with the
guilty when they were in accidental companionship, he knew already; and
that deeply-laid plans for the destruction of inconveniently knowing or
over-communicative persons, had been really devised and carried out by
the Jew on more occasions than one, he thought by no means unlikely,
when he recollected the general nature of the altercations between that
gentleman and Mr. Sikes: which seemed to bear reference to some
foregone conspiracy of the kind.  As he glanced timidly up, and met the
Jew's searching look, he felt that his pale face and trembling limbs
were neither unnoticed nor unrelished by that wary old gentleman.

The Jew, smiling hideously, patted Oliver on the head, and said, that
if he kept himself quiet, and applied himself to business, he saw they
would be very good friends yet.  Then, taking his hat, and covering
himself with an old patched great-coat, he went out, and locked the
room-door behind him.

And so Oliver remained all that day, and for the greater part of many
subsequent days, seeing nobody, between early morning and midnight, and
left during the long hours to commune with his own thoughts.  Which,
never failing to revert to his kind friends, and the opinion they must
long ago have formed of him, were sad indeed.

After the lapse of a week or so, the Jew left the room-door unlocked;
and he was at liberty to wander about the house.

It was a very dirty place.  The rooms upstairs had great high wooden
chimney-pieces and large doors, with panelled walls and cornices to the
ceiling; which, although they were black with neglect and dust, were
ornamented in various ways.  From all of these tokens Oliver concluded
that a long time ago, before the old Jew was born, it had belonged to
better people, and had perhaps been quite gay and handsome:  dismal and
dreary as it looked now.

Spiders had built their webs in the angles of the walls and ceilings;
and sometimes, when Oliver walked softly into a room, the mice would
scamper across the floor, and run back terrified to their holes.  With
these exceptions, there was neither sight nor sound of any living
thing; and often, when it grew dark, and he was tired of wandering from
room to room, he would crouch in the corner of the passage by the
street-door, to be as near living people as he could; and would remain
there, listening and counting the hours, until the Jew or the boys
returned.

In all the rooms, the mouldering shutters were fast closed:  the bars
which held them were screwed tight into the wood; the only light which
was admitted, stealing its way through round holes at the top: which
made the rooms more gloomy, and filled them with strange shadows.
There was a back-garret window with rusty bars outside, which had no
shutter; and out of this, Oliver often gazed with a melancholy face for
hours together; but nothing was to be descried from it but a confused
and crowded mass of housetops, blackened chimneys, and gable-ends.
Sometimes, indeed, a grizzly head might be seen, peering over the
parapet-wall of a distant house; but it was quickly withdrawn again;
and as the window of Oliver's observatory was nailed down, and dimmed
with the rain and smoke of years, it was as much as he could do to make
out the forms of the different objects beyond, without making any
attempt to be seen or heard,--which he had as much chance of being, as
if he had lived inside the ball of St. Paul's Cathedral.

One afternoon, the Dodger and Master Bates being engaged out that
evening, the first-named young gentleman took it into his head to
evince some anxiety regarding the decoration of his person (to do him
justice, this was by no means an habitual weakness with him); and, with
this end and aim, he condescendingly commanded Oliver to assist him in
his toilet, straightway.

Oliver was but too glad to make himself useful; too happy to have some
faces, however bad, to look upon; too desirous to conciliate those
about him when he could honestly do so; to throw any objection in the
way of this proposal.  So he at once expressed his readiness; and,
kneeling on the floor, while the Dodger sat upon the table so that he
could take his foot in his laps, he applied himself to a process which
Mr. Dawkins designated as 'japanning his trotter-cases.'  The phrase,
rendered into plain English, signifieth, cleaning his boots.

Whether it was the sense of freedom and independence which a rational
animal may be supposed to feel when he sits on a table in an easy
attitude smoking a pipe, swinging one leg carelessly to and fro, and
having his boots cleaned all the time, without even the past trouble of
having taken them off, or the prospective misery of putting them on, to
disturb his reflections; or whether it was the goodness of the tobacco
that soothed the feelings of the Dodger, or the mildness of the beer
that mollified his thoughts; he was evidently tinctured, for the nonce,
with a spice of romance and enthusiasm, foreign to his general nature.
He looked down on Oliver, with a thoughtful countenance, for a brief
space; and then, raising his head, and heaving a gentle sign, said,
half in abstraction, and half to Master Bates:

'What a pity it is he isn't a prig!'

'Ah!' said Master Charles Bates; 'he don't know what's good for him.'

The Dodger sighed again, and resumed his pipe: as did Charley Bates.
They both smoked, for some seconds, in silence.

'I suppose you don't even know what a prig is?' said the Dodger
mournfully.

'I think I know that,' replied Oliver, looking up.  'It's a the--;
you're one, are you not?' inquired Oliver, checking himself.

'I am,' replied the Dodger.  'I'd scorn to be anything else.'  Mr.
Dawkins gave his hat a ferocious cock, after delivering this sentiment,
and looked at Master Bates, as if to denote that he would feel obliged
by his saying anything to the contrary.

'I am,' repeated the Dodger.  'So's Charley.  So's Fagin. So's Sikes.
So's Nancy.  So's Bet.  So we all are, down to the dog. And he's the
downiest one of the lot!'

'And the least given to peaching,' added Charley Bates.

'He wouldn't so much as bark in a witness-box, for fear of committing
himself; no, not if you tied him up in one, and left him there without
wittles for a fortnight,' said the Dodger.

'Not a bit of it,' observed Charley.

'He's a rum dog.  Don't he look fierce at any strange cove that laughs
or sings when he's in company!' pursued the Dodger. 'Won't he growl at
all, when he hears a fiddle playing!  And don't he hate other dogs as
ain't of his breed!  Oh, no!'

'He's an out-and-out Christian,' said Charley.

This was merely intended as a tribute to the animal's abilities, but it
was an appropriate remark in another sense, if Master Bates had only
known it; for there are a good many ladies and gentlemen, claiming to
be out-and-out Christians, between whom, and Mr. Sikes' dog, there
exist strong and singular points of resemblance.

'Well, well,' said the Dodger, recurring to the point from which they
had strayed: with that mindfulness of his profession which influenced
all his proceedings.  'This hasn't go anything to do with young Green
here.'

'No more it has,' said Charley.  'Why don't you put yourself under
Fagin, Oliver?'

'And make your fortun' out of hand?' added the Dodger, with a grin.

'And so be able to retire on your property, and do the gen-teel: as I
mean to, in the very next leap-year but four that ever comes, and the
forty-second Tuesday in Trinity-week,' said Charley Bates.

'I don't like it,' rejoined Oliver, timidly; 'I wish they would let me
go.  I--I--would rather go.'

'And Fagin would RATHER not!' rejoined Charley.

Oliver knew this too well; but thinking it might be dangerous to
express his feelings more openly, he only sighed, and went on with his
boot-cleaning.

'Go!' exclaimed the Dodger.  'Why, where's your spirit?' Don't you take
any pride out of yourself?  Would you go and be dependent on your
friends?'

'Oh, blow that!' said Master Bates: drawing two or three silk
handkerchiefs from his pocket, and tossing them into a cupboard,
'that's too mean; that is.'

'_I_ couldn't do it,' said the Dodger, with an air of haughty disgust.

'You can leave your friends, though,' said Oliver with a half smile;
'and let them be punished for what you did.'

'That,' rejoined the Dodger, with a wave of his pipe, 'That was all out
of consideration for Fagin, 'cause the traps know that we work
together, and he might have got into trouble if we hadn't made our
lucky; that was the move, wasn't it, Charley?'

Master Bates nodded assent, and would have spoken, but the recollection
of Oliver's flight came so suddenly upon him, that the smoke he was
inhaling got entangled with a laugh, and went up into his head, and
down into his throat: and brought on a fit of coughing and stamping,
about five minutes long.

'Look here!' said the Dodger, drawing forth a handful of shillings and
halfpence. 'Here's a jolly life!  What's the odds where it comes from?
Here, catch hold; there's plenty more where they were took from.  You
won't, won't you?  Oh, you precious flat!'

'It's naughty, ain't it, Oliver?' inquired Charley Bates. 'He'll come
to be scragged, won't he?'

'I don't know what that means,' replied Oliver.

'Something in this way, old feller,' said Charly.  As he said it,
Master Bates caught up an end of his neckerchief; and, holding it erect
in the air, dropped his head on his shoulder, and jerked a curious
sound through his teeth; thereby indicating, by a lively pantomimic
representation, that scragging and hanging were one and the same thing.

'That's what it means,' said Charley.  'Look how he stares, Jack!

I never did see such prime company as that 'ere boy; he'll be the death
of me, I know he will.'  Master Charley Bates, having laughed heartily
again, resumed his pipe with tears in his eyes.

'You've been brought up bad,' said the Dodger, surveying his boots with
much satisfaction when Oliver had polished them. 'Fagin will make
something of you, though, or you'll be the first he ever had that
turned out unprofitable.  You'd better begin at once; for you'll come
to the trade long before you think of it; and you're only losing time,
Oliver.'

Master Bates backed this advice with sundry moral admonitions of his
own:  which, being exhausted, he and his friend Mr. Dawkins launched
into a glowing description of the numerous pleasures incidental to the
life they led, interspersed with a variety of hints to Oliver that the
best thing he could do, would be to secure Fagin's favour without more
delay, by the means which they themselves had employed to gain it.

'And always put this in your pipe, Nolly,' said the Dodger, as the Jew
was heard unlocking the door above, 'if you don't take fogels and
tickers--'

'What's the good of talking in that way?' interposed Master Bates; 'he
don't know what you mean.'

'If you don't take pocket-handkechers and watches,' said the Dodger,
reducing his conversation to the level of Oliver's capacity, 'some
other cove will; so that the coves that lose 'em will be all the worse,
and you'll be all the worse, too, and nobody half a ha'p'orth the
better, except the chaps wot gets them--and you've just as good a right
to them as they have.'

'To be sure, to be sure!' said the Jew, who had entered unseen by
Oliver.  'It all lies in a nutshell my dear; in a nutshell, take the
Dodger's word for it.  Ha! ha! ha!  He understands the catechism of his
trade.'

The old man rubbed his hands gleefully together, as he corroborated the
Dodger's reasoning in these terms; and chuckled with delight at his
pupil's proficiency.

The conversation proceeded no farther at this time, for the Jew had
returned home accompanied by Miss Betsy, and a gentleman whom Oliver
had never seen before, but who was accosted by the Dodger as Tom
Chitling; and who, having lingered on the stairs to exchange a few
gallantries with the lady, now made his appearance.

Mr. Chitling was older in years than the Dodger: having perhaps
numbered eighteen winters; but there was a degree of deference in his
deportment towards that young gentleman which seemed to indicate that
he felt himself conscious of a slight inferiority in point of genius
and professional aquirements.  He had small twinkling eyes, and a
pock-marked face; wore a fur cap, a dark corduroy jacket, greasy
fustian trousers, and an apron.  His wardrobe was, in truth, rather out
of repair; but he excused himself to the company by stating that his
'time' was only out an hour before; and that, in consequence of having
worn the regimentals for six weeks past, he had not been able to bestow
any attention on his private clothes.  Mr. Chitling added, with strong
marks of irritation, that the new way of fumigating clothes up yonder
was infernal unconstitutional, for it burnt holes in them, and there
was no remedy against the County.  The same remark he considered to
apply to the regulation mode of cutting the hair: which he held to be
decidedly unlawful.  Mr. Chitling wound up his observations by stating
that he had not touched a drop of anything for forty-two moral long
hard-working days; and that he 'wished he might be busted if he warn't
as dry as a lime-basket.'

'Where do you think the gentleman has come from, Oliver?' inquired the
Jew, with a grin, as the other boys put a bottle of spirits on the
table.

'I--I--don't know, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Who's that?' inquired Tom Chitling, casting a contemptuous look at
Oliver.

'A young friend of mine, my dear,' replied the Jew.

'He's in luck, then,' said the young man, with a meaning look at Fagin.
'Never mind where I came from, young 'un; you'll find your way there,
soon enough, I'll bet a crown!'

At this sally, the boys laughed.  After some more jokes on the same
subject, they exchanged a few short whispers with Fagin; and withdrew.

After some words apart between the last comer and Fagin, they drew
their chairs towards the fire; and the Jew, telling Oliver to come and
sit by him, led the conversation to the topics most calculated to
interest his hearers.  These were, the great advantages of the trade,
the proficiency of the Dodger, the amiability of Charley Bates, and the
liberality of the Jew himself.  At length these subjects displayed
signs of being thoroughly exhausted; and Mr. Chitling did the same:
for the house of correction becomes fatiguing after a week or two.
Miss Betsy accordingly withdrew; and left the party to their repose.

From this day, Oliver was seldom left alone; but was placed in almost
constant communication with the two boys, who played the old game with
the Jew every day: whether for their own improvement or Oliver's, Mr.
Fagin best knew.  At other times the old man would tell them stories of
robberies he had committed in his younger days:  mixed up with so much
that was droll and curious, that Oliver could not help laughing
heartily, and showing that he was amused in spite of all his better
feelings.

In short, the wily old Jew had the boy in his toils.  Having prepared
his mind, by solitude and gloom, to prefer any society to the
companionship of his own sad thoughts in such a dreary place, he was
now slowly instilling into his soul the poison which he hoped would
blacken it, and change its hue for ever.



CHAPTER XIX

IN WHICH A NOTABLE PLAN IS DISCUSSED AND DETERMINED ON

It was a chill, damp, windy night, when the Jew: buttoning his
great-coat tight round his shrivelled body, and pulling the collar up
over his ears so as completely to obscure the lower part of his face:
emerged from his den.  He paused on the step as the door was locked and
chained behind him; and having listened while the boys made all secure,
and until their retreating footsteps were no longer audible, slunk down
the street as quickly as he could.

The house to which Oliver had been conveyed, was in the neighborhood of
Whitechapel.  The Jew stopped for an instant at the corner of the
street; and, glancing suspiciously round, crossed the road, and struck
off in the direction of the Spitalfields.

The mud lay thick upon the stones, and a black mist hung over the
streets; the rain fell sluggishly down, and everything felt cold and
clammy to the touch.  It seemed just the night when it befitted such a
being as the Jew to be abroad.  As he glided stealthily along, creeping
beneath the shelter of the walls and doorways, the hideous old man
seemed like some loathsome reptile, engendered in the slime and
darkness through which he moved: crawling forth, by night, in search of
some rich offal for a meal.

He kept on his course, through many winding and narrow ways, until he
reached Bethnal Green; then, turning suddenly off to the left, he soon
became involved in a maze of the mean and dirty streets which abound in
that close and densely-populated quarter.

The Jew was evidently too familiar with the ground he traversed to be
at all bewildered, either by the darkness of the night, or the
intricacies of the way.  He hurried through several alleys and streets,
and at length turned into one, lighted only by a single lamp at the
farther end.  At the door of a house in this street, he knocked; having
exchanged a few muttered words with the person who opened it, he walked
upstairs.

A dog growled as he touched the handle of a room-door; and a man's
voice demanded who was there.

'Only me, Bill; only me, my dear,' said the Jew looking in.

'Bring in your body then,' said Sikes.  'Lie down, you stupid brute!
Don't you know the devil when he's got a great-coat on?'

Apparently, the dog had been somewhat deceived by Mr. Fagin's outer
garment; for as the Jew unbuttoned it, and threw it over the back of a
chair, he retired to the corner from which he had risen:  wagging his
tail as he went, to show that he was as well satisfied as it was in his
nature to be.

'Well!' said Sikes.

'Well, my dear,' replied the Jew.--'Ah! Nancy.'

The latter recognition was uttered with just enough of embarrassment to
imply a doubt of its reception; for Mr. Fagin and his young friend had
not met, since she had interfered in behalf of Oliver.  All doubts upon
the subject, if he had any, were speedily removed by the young lady's
behaviour.  She took her feet off the fender, pushed back her chair,
and bade Fagin draw up his, without saying more about it:  for it was a
cold night, and no mistake.

'It is cold, Nancy dear,' said the Jew, as he warmed his skinny hands
over the fire.  'It seems to go right through one,' added the old man,
touching his side.

'It must be a piercer, if it finds its way through your heart,' said
Mr. Sikes.  'Give him something to drink, Nancy.  Burn my body, make
haste!  It's enough to turn a man ill, to see his lean old carcase
shivering in that way, like a ugly ghost just rose from the grave.'

Nancy quickly brought a bottle from a cupboard, in which there were
many:  which, to judge from the diversity of their appearance, were
filled with several kinds of liquids.  Sikes pouring out a glass of
brandy, bade the Jew drink it off.

'Quite enough, quite, thankye, Bill,' replied the Jew, putting down the
glass after just setting his lips to it.

'What!  You're afraid of our getting the better of you, are you?'
inquired Sikes, fixing his eyes on the Jew.  'Ugh!'

With a hoarse grunt of contempt, Mr. Sikes seized the glass, and threw
the remainder of its contents into the ashes: as a preparatory ceremony
to filling it again for himself:  which he did at once.

The Jew glanced round the room, as his companion tossed down the second
glassful; not in curiousity, for he had seen it often before; but in a
restless and suspicious manner habitual to him. It was a meanly
furnished apartment, with nothing but the contents of the closet to
induce the belief that its occupier was anything but a working man; and
with no more suspicious articles displayed to view than two or three
heavy bludgeons which stood in a corner, and a 'life-preserver' that
hung over the chimney-piece.

'There,' said Sikes, smacking his lips. 'Now I'm ready.'

'For business?' inquired the Jew.

'For business,' replied Sikes; 'so say what you've got to say.'

'About the crib at Chertsey, Bill?' said the Jew, drawing his chair
forward, and speaking in a very low voice.

'Yes.  Wot about it?' inquired Sikes.

'Ah! you know what I mean, my dear,' said the Jew.  'He knows what I
mean, Nancy; don't he?'

'No, he don't,' sneered Mr. Sikes.  'Or he won't, and that's the same
thing.  Speak out, and call things by their right names; don't sit
there, winking and blinking, and talking to me in hints, as if you
warn't the very first that thought about the robbery.  Wot d'ye mean?'

'Hush, Bill, hush!' said the Jew, who had in vain attempted to stop
this burst of indignation; 'somebody will hear us, my dear. Somebody
will hear us.'

'Let 'em hear!' said Sikes; 'I don't care.'  But as Mr. Sikes DID care,
on reflection, he dropped his voice as he said the words, and grew
calmer.

'There, there,' said the Jew, coaxingly.  'It was only my caution,
nothing more.  Now, my dear, about that crib at Chertsey; when is it to
be done, Bill, eh?  When is it to be done?  Such plate, my dear, such
plate!' said the Jew:  rubbing his hands, and elevating his eyebrows in
a rapture of anticipation.

'Not at all,' replied Sikes coldly.

'Not to be done at all!' echoed the Jew, leaning back in his chair.

'No, not at all,' rejoined Sikes.  'At least it can't be a put-up job,
as we expected.'

'Then it hasn't been properly gone about,' said the Jew, turning pale
with anger.  'Don't tell me!'

'But I will tell you,' retorted Sikes.  'Who are you that's not to be
told?  I tell you that Toby Crackit has been hanging about the place
for a fortnight, and he can't get one of the servants in line.'

'Do you mean to tell me, Bill,' said the Jew: softening as the other
grew heated:  'that neither of the two men in the house can be got
over?'

'Yes, I do mean to tell you so,' replied Sikes.  'The old lady has had
'em these twenty years; and if you were to give 'em five hundred pound,
they wouldn't be in it.'

'But do you mean to say, my dear,' remonstrated the Jew, 'that the
women can't be got over?'

'Not a bit of it,' replied Sikes.

'Not by flash Toby Crackit?' said the Jew incredulously. 'Think what
women are, Bill,'

'No; not even by flash Toby Crackit,' replied Sikes.  'He says he's
worn sham whiskers, and a canary waistcoat, the whole blessed time he's
been loitering down there, and it's all of no use.'

'He should have tried mustachios and a pair of military trousers, my
dear,' said the Jew.

'So he did,' rejoined Sikes, 'and they warn't of no more use than the
other plant.'

The Jew looked blank at this information.  After ruminating for some
minutes with his chin sunk on his breast, he raised his head and said,
with a deep sigh, that if flash Toby Crackit reported aright, he feared
the game was up.

'And yet,' said the old man, dropping his hands on his knees, 'it's a
sad thing, my dear, to lose so much when we had set our hearts upon it.'

'So it is,' said Mr. Sikes.  'Worse luck!'

A long silence ensued; during which the Jew was plunged in deep
thought, with his face wrinkled into an expression of villainy
perfectly demoniacal.  Sikes eyed him furtively from time to time.
Nancy, apparently fearful of irritating the housebreaker, sat with her
eyes fixed upon the fire, as if she had been deaf to all that passed.

'Fagin,' said Sikes, abruptly breaking the stillness that prevailed;
'is it worth fifty shiners extra, if it's safely done from the outside?'

'Yes,' said the Jew, as suddenly rousing himself.

'Is it a bargain?' inquired Sikes.

'Yes, my dear, yes,' rejoined the Jew; his eyes glistening, and every
muscle in his face working, with the excitement that the inquiry had
awakened.

'Then,' said Sikes, thrusting aside the Jew's hand, with some disdain,
'let it come off as soon as you like.  Toby and me were over the
garden-wall the night afore last, sounding the panels of the door and
shutters.  The crib's barred up at night like a jail; but there's one
part we can crack, safe and softly.'

'Which is that, Bill?' asked the Jew eagerly.

'Why,' whispered Sikes, 'as you cross the lawn--'

'Yes?' said the Jew, bending his head forward, with his eyes almost
starting out of it.

'Umph!' cried Sikes, stopping short, as the girl, scarcely moving her
head, looked suddenly round, and pointed for an instant to the Jew's
face.  'Never mind which part it is. You can't do it without me, I
know; but it's best to be on the safe side when one deals with you.'

'As you like, my dear, as you like' replied the Jew.  'Is there no help
wanted, but yours and Toby's?'

'None,' said Sikes.  'Cept a centre-bit and a boy.  The first we've
both got; the second you must find us.'

'A boy!' exclaimed the Jew.  'Oh! then it's a panel, eh?'

'Never mind wot it is!' replied Sikes.  'I want a boy, and he musn't be
a big 'un.  Lord!' said Mr. Sikes, reflectively, 'if I'd only got that
young boy of Ned, the chimbley-sweeper's!  He kept him small on
purpose, and let him out by the job.  But the father gets lagged; and
then the Juvenile Delinquent Society comes, and takes the boy away from
a trade where he was earning money, teaches him to read and write, and
in time makes a 'prentice of him.  And so they go on,' said Mr. Sikes,
his wrath rising with the recollection of his wrongs, 'so they go on;
and, if they'd got money enough (which it's a Providence they haven't,)
we shouldn't have half a dozen boys left in the whole trade, in a year
or two.'

'No more we should,' acquiesced the Jew, who had been considering
during this speech, and had only caught the last sentence. 'Bill!'

'What now?' inquired Sikes.

The Jew nodded his head towards Nancy, who was still gazing at the
fire; and intimated, by a sign, that he would have her told to leave
the room.  Sikes shrugged his shoulders impatiently, as if he thought
the precaution unnecessary; but complied, nevertheless, by requesting
Miss Nancy to fetch him a jug of beer.

'You don't want any beer,' said Nancy, folding her arms, and retaining
her seat very composedly.

'I tell you I do!' replied Sikes.

'Nonsense,' rejoined the girl coolly, 'Go on, Fagin.  I know what he's
going to say, Bill; he needn't mind me.'

The Jew still hesitated.  Sikes looked from one to the other in some
surprise.

'Why, you don't mind the old girl, do you, Fagin?' he asked at length.
'You've known her long enough to trust her, or the Devil's in it.  She
ain't one to blab.  Are you Nancy?'

'_I_ should think not!' replied the young lady:  drawing her chair up
to the table, and putting her elbows upon it.

'No, no, my dear, I know you're not,' said the Jew; 'but--' and again
the old man paused.

'But wot?' inquired Sikes.

'I didn't know whether she mightn't p'r'aps be out of sorts, you know,
my dear, as she was the other night,' replied the Jew.

At this confession, Miss Nancy burst into a loud laugh; and, swallowing
a glass of brandy, shook her head with an air of defiance, and burst
into sundry exclamations of 'Keep the game a-going!'  'Never say die!'
and the like.  These seemed to have the effect of re-assuring both
gentlemen; for the Jew nodded his head with a satisfied air, and
resumed his seat: as did Mr. Sikes likewise.

'Now, Fagin,' said Nancy with a laugh.  'Tell Bill at once, about
Oliver!'

'Ha! you're a clever one, my dear: the sharpest girl I ever saw!' said
the Jew, patting her on the neck.  'It WAS about Oliver I was going to
speak, sure enough.  Ha! ha! ha!'

'What about him?' demanded Sikes.

'He's the boy for you, my dear,' replied the Jew in a hoarse whisper;
laying his finger on the side of his nose, and grinning frightfully.

'He!' exclaimed Sikes.

'Have him, Bill!' said Nancy.  'I would, if I was in your place. He
mayn't be so much up, as any of the others; but that's not what you
want, if he's only to open a door for you.  Depend upon it he's a safe
one, Bill.'

'I know he is,' rejoined Fagin.  'He's been in good training these last
few weeks, and it's time he began to work for his bread.  Besides, the
others are all too big.'

'Well, he is just the size I want,' said Mr. Sikes, ruminating.

'And will do everything you want, Bill, my dear,' interposed the Jew;
'he can't help himself.  That is, if you frighten him enough.'

'Frighten him!' echoed Sikes.  'It'll be no sham frightening, mind you.
If there's anything queer about him when we once get into the work; in
for a penny, in for a pound.  You won't see him alive again, Fagin.
Think of that, before you send him.  Mark my words!' said the robber,
poising a crowbar, which he had drawn from under the bedstead.

'I've thought of it all,' said the Jew with energy. 'I've--I've had my
eye upon him, my dears, close--close. Once let him feel that he is one
of us; once fill his mind with the idea that he has been a thief; and
he's ours!  Ours for his life.  Oho!  It couldn't have come about
better!  The old man crossed his arms upon his breast; and, drawing his
head and shoulders into a heap, literally hugged himself for joy.

'Ours!' said Sikes.  'Yours, you mean.'

'Perhaps I do, my dear,' said the Jew, with a shrill chuckle. 'Mine, if
you like, Bill.'

'And wot,' said Sikes, scowling fiercely on his agreeable friend, 'wot
makes you take so much pains about one chalk-faced kid, when you know
there are fifty boys snoozing about Common Garden every night, as you
might pick and choose from?'

'Because they're of no use to me, my dear,' replied the Jew, with some
confusion, 'not worth the taking.  Their looks convict 'em when they
get into trouble, and I lose 'em all.  With this boy, properly managed,
my dears, I could do what I couldn't with twenty of them.  Besides,'
said the Jew, recovering his self-possession, 'he has us now if he
could only give us leg-bail again; and he must be in the same boat with
us.  Never mind how he came there; it's quite enough for my power over
him that he was in a robbery; that's all I want.  Now, how much better
this is, than being obliged to put the poor leetle boy out of the
way--which would be dangerous, and we should lose by it besides.'

'When is it to be done?' asked Nancy, stopping some turbulent
exclamation on the part of Mr. Sikes, expressive of the disgust with
which he received Fagin's affectation of humanity.

'Ah, to be sure,' said the Jew; 'when is it to be done, Bill?'

'I planned with Toby, the night arter to-morrow,' rejoined Sikes in a
surly voice, 'if he heerd nothing from me to the contrairy.'

'Good,' said the Jew; 'there's no moon.'

'No,' rejoined Sikes.

'It's all arranged about bringing off the swag, is it?' asked the Jew.

Sikes nodded.

'And about--'

'Oh, ah, it's all planned,' rejoined Sikes, interrupting him. 'Never
mind particulars.  You'd better bring the boy here to-morrow night.  I
shall get off the stone an hour arter daybreak.  Then you hold your
tongue, and keep the melting-pot ready, and that's all you'll have to
do.'

After some discussion, in which all three took an active part, it was
decided that Nancy should repair to the Jew's next evening when the
night had set in, and bring Oliver away with her; Fagin craftily
observing, that, if he evinced any disinclination to the task, he would
be more willing to accompany the girl who had so recently interfered in
his behalf, than anybody else.  It was also solemnly arranged that poor
Oliver should, for the purposes of the contemplated expedition, be
unreservedly consigned to the care and custody of Mr. William Sikes;
and further, that the said Sikes should deal with him as he thought
fit; and should not be held responsible by the Jew for any mischance or
evil that might be necessary to visit him: it being understood that, to
render the compact in this respect binding, any representations made by
Mr. Sikes on his return should be required to be confirmed and
corroborated, in all important particulars, by the testimony of flash
Toby Crackit.

These preliminaries adjusted, Mr. Sikes proceeded to drink brandy at a
furious rate, and to flourish the crowbar in an alarming manner;
yelling forth, at the same time, most unmusical snatches of song,
mingled with wild execrations.  At length, in a fit of professional
enthusiasm, he insisted upon producing his box of housebreaking tools:
which he had no sooner stumbled in with, and opened for the purpose of
explaining the nature and properties of the various implements it
contained, and the peculiar beauties of their construction, than he
fell over the box upon the floor, and went to sleep where he fell.

'Good-night, Nancy,' said the Jew, muffling himself up as before.

'Good-night.'

Their eyes met, and the Jew scrutinised her, narrowly.  There was no
flinching about the girl.  She was as true and earnest in the matter as
Toby Crackit himself could be.

The Jew again bade her good-night, and, bestowing a sly kick upon the
prostrate form of Mr. Sikes while her back was turned, groped
downstairs.

'Always the way!' muttered the Jew to himself as he turned homeward.
'The worst of these women is, that a very little thing serves to call
up some long-forgotten feeling; and, the best of them is, that it never
lasts.  Ha! ha!  The man against the child, for a bag of gold!'

Beguiling the time with these pleasant reflections, Mr. Fagin wended
his way, through mud and mire, to his gloomy abode:  where the Dodger
was sitting up, impatiently awaiting his return.

'Is Oliver a-bed?  I want to speak to him,' was his first remark as
they descended the stairs.

'Hours ago,' replied the Dodger, throwing open a door.  'Here he is!'

The boy was lying, fast asleep, on a rude bed upon the floor; so pale
with anxiety, and sadness, and the closeness of his prison, that he
looked like death; not death as it shows in shroud and coffin, but in
the guise it wears when life has just departed; when a young and gentle
spirit has, but an instant, fled to Heaven, and the gross air of the
world has not had time to breathe upon the changing dust it hallowed.

'Not now,' said the Jew, turning softly away.  'To-morrow. To-morrow.'



CHAPTER XX

WHEREIN OLIVER IS DELIVERED OVER TO MR. WILLIAM SIKES

When Oliver awoke in the morning, he was a good deal surprised to find
that a new pair of shoes, with strong thick soles, had been placed at
his bedside; and that his old shoes had been removed. At first, he was
pleased with the discovery: hoping that it might be the forerunner of
his release; but such thoughts were quickly dispelled, on his sitting
down to breakfast along with the Jew, who told him, in a tone and
manner which increased his alarm, that he was to be taken to the
residence of Bill Sikes that night.

'To--to--stop there, sir?' asked Oliver, anxiously.

'No, no, my dear.  Not to stop there,' replied the Jew.  'We shouldn't
like to lose you.  Don't be afraid, Oliver, you shall come back to us
again.  Ha! ha! ha!  We won't be so cruel as to send you away, my dear.
Oh no, no!'

The old man, who was stooping over the fire toasting a piece of bread,
looked round as he bantered Oliver thus; and chuckled as if to show
that he knew he would still be very glad to get away if he could.

'I suppose,' said the Jew, fixing his eyes on Oliver, 'you want to know
what you're going to Bill's for---eh, my dear?'

Oliver coloured, involuntarily, to find that the old thief had been
reading his thoughts; but boldly said, Yes, he did want to know.

'Why, do you think?' inquired Fagin, parrying the question.

'Indeed I don't know, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Bah!' said the Jew, turning away with a disappointed countenance from
a close perusal of the boy's face.  'Wait till Bill tells you, then.'

The Jew seemed much vexed by Oliver's not expressing any greater
curiosity on the subject; but the truth is, that, although Oliver felt
very anxious, he was too much confused by the earnest cunning of
Fagin's looks, and his own speculations, to make any further inquiries
just then.  He had no other opportunity:  for the Jew remained very
surly and silent till night:  when he prepared to go abroad.

'You may burn a candle,' said the Jew, putting one upon the table.
'And here's a book for you to read, till they come to fetch you.
Good-night!'

'Good-night!' replied Oliver, softly.

The Jew walked to the door: looking over his shoulder at the boy as he
went.  Suddenly stopping, he called him by his name.

Oliver looked up; the Jew, pointing to the candle, motioned him to
light it.  He did so; and, as he placed the candlestick upon the table,
saw that the Jew was gazing fixedly at him, with lowering and
contracted brows, from the dark end of the room.

'Take heed, Oliver! take heed!' said the old man, shaking his right
hand before him in a warning manner.  'He's a rough man, and thinks
nothing of blood when his own is up. Whatever falls out, say nothing;
and do what he bids you.  Mind!'  Placing a strong emphasis on the last
word, he suffered his features gradually to resolve themselves into a
ghastly grin, and, nodding his head, left the room.

Oliver leaned his head upon his hand when the old man disappeared, and
pondered, with a trembling heart, on the words he had just heard.  The
more he thought of the Jew's admonition, the more he was at a loss to
divine its real purpose and meaning.

He could think of no bad object to be attained by sending him to Sikes,
which would not be equally well answered by his remaining with Fagin;
and after meditating for a long time, concluded that he had been
selected to perform some ordinary menial offices for the housebreaker,
until another boy, better suited for his purpose could be engaged.  He
was too well accustomed to suffering, and had suffered too much where
he was, to bewail the prospect of change very severely.  He remained
lost in thought for some minutes; and then, with a heavy sigh, snuffed
the candle, and, taking up the book which the Jew had left with him,
began to read.

He turned over the leaves.  Carelessly at first; but, lighting on a
passage which attracted his attention, he soon became intent upon the
volume.  It was a history of the lives and trials of great criminals;
and the pages were soiled and thumbed with use. Here, he read of
dreadful crimes that made the blood run cold; of secret murders that
had been committed by the lonely wayside; of bodies hidden from the eye
of man in deep pits and wells: which would not keep them down, deep as
they were, but had yielded them up at last, after many years, and so
maddened the murderers with the sight, that in their horror they had
confessed their guilt, and yelled for the gibbet to end their agony.
Here, too, he read of men who, lying in their beds at dead of night,
had been tempted (so they said) and led on, by their own bad thoughts,
to such dreadful bloodshed as it made the flesh creep, and the limbs
quail, to think of.  The terrible descriptions were so real and vivid,
that the sallow pages seemed to turn red with gore; and the words upon
them, to be sounded in his ears, as if they were whispered, in hollow
murmurs, by the spirits of the dead.

In a paroxysm of fear, the boy closed the book, and thrust it from him.
Then, falling upon his knees, he prayed Heaven to spare him from such
deeds; and rather to will that he should die at once, than be reserved
for crimes, so fearful and appalling. By degrees, he grew more calm,
and besought, in a low and broken voice, that he might be rescued from
his present dangers; and that if any aid were to be raised up for a
poor outcast boy who had never known the love of friends or kindred, it
might come to him now, when, desolate and deserted, he stood alone in
the midst of wickedness and guilt.

He had concluded his prayer, but still remained with his head buried in
his hands, when a rustling noise aroused him.

'What's that!' he cried, starting up, and catching sight of a figure
standing by the door.  'Who's there?'

'Me.  Only me,' replied a tremulous voice.

Oliver raised the candle above his head: and looked towards the door.
It was Nancy.

'Put down the light,' said the girl, turning away her head. 'It hurts
my eyes.'

Oliver saw that she was very pale, and gently inquired if she were ill.
The girl threw herself into a chair, with her back towards him:  and
wrung her hands; but made no reply.

'God forgive me!' she cried after a while, 'I never thought of this.'

'Has anything happened?' asked Oliver.  'Can I help you?  I will if I
can.  I will, indeed.'

She rocked herself to and fro; caught her throat; and, uttering a
gurgling sound, gasped for breath.

'Nancy!' cried Oliver, 'What is it?'

The girl beat her hands upon her knees, and her feet upon the ground;
and, suddenly stopping, drew her shawl close round her: and shivered
with cold.

Oliver stirred the fire.  Drawing her chair close to it, she sat there,
for a little time, without speaking; but at length she raised her head,
and looked round.

'I don't know what comes over me sometimes,' said she, affecting to
busy herself in arranging her dress; 'it's this damp dirty room, I
think.  Now, Nolly, dear, are you ready?'

'Am I to go with you?' asked Oliver.

'Yes.  I have come from Bill,' replied the girl.  'You are to go with
me.'

'What for?' asked Oliver, recoiling.

'What for?' echoed the girl, raising her eyes, and averting them again,
the moment they encountered the boy's face.  'Oh!  For no harm.'

'I don't believe it,' said Oliver:  who had watched her closely.

'Have it your own way,' rejoined the girl, affecting to laugh. 'For no
good, then.'

Oliver could see that he had some power over the girl's better
feelings, and, for an instant, thought of appealing to her compassion
for his helpless state.  But, then, the thought darted across his mind
that it was barely eleven o'clock; and that many people were still in
the streets:  of whom surely some might be found to give credence to
his tale.  As the reflection occured to him, he stepped forward:  and
said, somewhat hastily, that he was ready.

Neither his brief consideration, nor its purport, was lost on his
companion.  She eyed him narrowly, while he spoke; and cast upon him a
look of intelligence which sufficiently showed that she guessed what
had been passing in his thoughts.

'Hush!' said the girl, stooping over him, and pointing to the door as
she looked cautiously round.  'You can't help yourself. I have tried
hard for you, but all to no purpose.  You are hedged round and round.
If ever you are to get loose from here, this is not the time.'

Struck by the energy of her manner, Oliver looked up in her face with
great surprise.  She seemed to speak the truth; her countenance was
white and agitated; and she trembled with very earnestness.

'I have saved you from being ill-used once, and I will again, and I do
now,' continued the girl aloud; 'for those who would have fetched you,
if I had not, would have been far more rough than me.  I have promised
for your being quiet and silent; if you are not, you will only do harm
to yourself and me too, and perhaps be my death.  See here!  I have
borne all this for you already, as true as God sees me show it.'

She pointed, hastily, to some livid bruises on her neck and arms; and
continued, with great rapidity:

'Remember this!  And don't let me suffer more for you, just now. If I
could help you, I would; but I have not the power.  They don't mean to
harm you; whatever they make you do, is no fault of yours.  Hush!
Every word from you is a blow for me.  Give me your hand.  Make haste!
Your hand!'

She caught the hand which Oliver instinctively placed in hers, and,
blowing out the light, drew him after her up the stairs. The door was
opened, quickly, by some one shrouded in the darkness, and was as
quickly closed, when they had passed out.  A hackney-cabriolet was in
waiting; with the same vehemence which she had exhibited in addressing
Oliver, the girl pulled him in with her, and drew the curtains close.
The driver wanted no directions, but lashed his horse into full speed,
without the delay of an instant.

The girl still held Oliver fast by the hand, and continued to pour into
his ear, the warnings and assurances she had already imparted.  All was
so quick and hurried, that he had scarcely time to recollect where he
was, or how he came there, when the carriage stopped at the house to
which the Jew's steps had been directed on the previous evening.

For one brief moment, Oliver cast a hurried glance along the empty
street, and a cry for help hung upon his lips.  But the girl's voice
was in his ear, beseeching him in such tones of agony to remember her,
that he had not the heart to utter it. While he hesitated, the
opportunity was gone; he was already in the house, and the door was
shut.

'This way,' said the girl, releasing her hold for the first time.
'Bill!'

'Hallo!' replied Sikes: appearing at the head of the stairs, with a
candle.  'Oh!  That's the time of day.  Come on!'

This was a very strong expression of approbation, an uncommonly hearty
welcome, from a person of Mr. Sikes' temperament.  Nancy, appearing
much gratified thereby, saluted him cordially.

'Bull's-eye's gone home with Tom,' observed Sikes, as he lighted them
up.  'He'd have been in the way.'

'That's right,' rejoined Nancy.

'So you've got the kid,' said Sikes when they had all reached the room:
closing the door as he spoke.

'Yes, here he is,' replied Nancy.

'Did he come quiet?' inquired Sikes.

'Like a lamb,' rejoined Nancy.

'I'm glad to hear it,' said Sikes, looking grimly at Oliver; 'for the
sake of his young carcase:  as would otherways have suffered for it.
Come here, young 'un; and let me read you a lectur', which is as well
got over at once.'

Thus addressing his new pupil, Mr. Sikes pulled off Oliver's cap and
threw it into a corner; and then, taking him by the shoulder, sat
himself down by the table, and stood the boy in front of him.

'Now, first:  do you know wot this is?' inquired Sikes, taking up a
pocket-pistol which lay on the table.

Oliver replied in the affirmative.

'Well, then, look here,' continued Sikes.  'This is powder; that 'ere's
a bullet; and this is a little bit of a old hat for waddin'.'

Oliver murmured his comprehension of the different bodies referred to;
and Mr. Sikes proceeded to load the pistol, with great nicety and
deliberation.

'Now it's loaded,' said Mr. Sikes, when he had finished.

'Yes, I see it is, sir,' replied Oliver.

'Well,' said the robber, grasping Oliver's wrist, and putting the
barrel so close to his temple that they touched; at which moment the
boy could not repress a start; 'if you speak a word when you're out
o'doors with me, except when I speak to you, that loading will be in
your head without notice.  So, if you _do_ make up your mind to speak
without leave, say your prayers first.'

Having bestowed a scowl upon the object of this warning, to increase
its effect, Mr. Sikes continued.

'As near as I know, there isn't anybody as would be asking very
partickler arter you, if you _was_ disposed of; so I needn't take this
devil-and-all of trouble to explain matters to you, if it warn't for
your own good.  D'ye hear me?'

'The short and the long of what you mean,' said Nancy:  speaking very
emphatically, and slightly frowning at Oliver as if to bespeak his
serious attention to her words:  'is, that if you're crossed by him in
this job you have on hand, you'll prevent his ever telling tales
afterwards, by shooting him through the head, and will take your chance
of swinging for it, as you do for a great many other things in the way
of business, every month of your life.'

'That's it!' observed Mr. Sikes, approvingly; 'women can always put
things in fewest words.--Except when it's blowing up; and then they
lengthens it out.  And now that he's thoroughly up to it, let's have
some supper, and get a snooze before starting.'

In pursuance of this request, Nancy quickly laid the cloth;
disappearing for a few minutes, she presently returned with a pot of
porter and a dish of sheep's heads: which gave occasion to several
pleasant witticisms on the part of Mr. Sikes, founded upon the singular
coincidence of 'jemmies' being a can name, common to them, and also to
an ingenious implement much used in his profession.  Indeed, the worthy
gentleman, stimulated perhaps by the immediate prospect of being on
active service, was in great spirits and good humour; in proof whereof,
it may be here remarked, that he humourously drank all the beer at a
draught, and did not utter, on a rough calculation, more than
four-score oaths during the whole progress of the meal.

Supper being ended--it may be easily conceived that Oliver had no great
appetite for it--Mr. Sikes disposed of a couple of glasses of spirits
and water, and threw himself on the bed; ordering Nancy, with many
imprecations in case of failure, to call him at five precisely.  Oliver
stretched himself in his clothes, by command of the same authority, on
a mattress upon the floor; and the girl, mending the fire, sat before
it, in readiness to rouse them at the appointed time.

For a long time Oliver lay awake, thinking it not impossible that Nancy
might seek that opportunity of whispering some further advice; but the
girl sat brooding over the fire, without moving, save now and then to
trim the light.  Weary with watching and anxiety, he at length fell
asleep.

When he awoke, the table was covered with tea-things, and Sikes was
thrusting various articles into the pockets of his great-coat, which
hung over the back of a chair.  Nancy was busily engaged in preparing
breakfast.  It was not yet daylight; for the candle was still burning,
and it was quite dark outside. A sharp rain, too, was beating against
the window-panes; and the sky looked black and cloudy.

'Now, then!' growled Sikes, as Oliver started up; 'half-past five!
Look sharp, or you'll get no breakfast; for it's late as it is.'

Oliver was not long in making his toilet; having taken some breakfast,
he replied to a surly inquiry from Sikes, by saying that he was quite
ready.

Nancy, scarcely looking at the boy, threw him a handkerchief to tie
round his throat; Sikes gave him a large rough cape to button over his
shoulders.  Thus attired, he gave his hand to the robber, who, merely
pausing to show him with a menacing gesture that he had that same
pistol in a side-pocket of his great-coat, clasped it firmly in his,
and, exchanging a farewell with Nancy, led him away.

Oliver turned, for an instant, when they reached the door, in the hope
of meeting a look from the girl.  But she had resumed her old seat in
front of the fire, and sat, perfectly motionless before it.



CHAPTER XXI

THE EXPEDITION

It was a cheerless morning when they got into the street; blowing and
raining hard; and the clouds looking dull and stormy.  The night had
been very wet: large pools of water had collected in the road: and the
kennels were overflowing.  There was a faint glimmering of the coming
day in the sky; but it rather aggravated than relieved the gloom of the
scene:  the sombre light only serving to pale that which the street
lamps afforded, without shedding any warmer or brighter tints upon the
wet house-tops, and dreary streets.  There appeared to be nobody
stirring in that quarter of the town; the windows of the houses were
all closely shut; and the streets through which they passed, were
noiseless and empty.

By the time they had turned into the Bethnal Green Road, the day had
fairly begun to break.  Many of the lamps were already extinguished; a
few country waggons were slowly toiling on, towards London; now and
then, a stage-coach, covered with mud, rattled briskly by: the driver
bestowing, as he passed, an admonitory lash upon the heavy waggoner
who, by keeping on the wrong side of the road, had endangered his
arriving at the office, a quarter of a minute after his time.  The
public-houses, with gas-lights burning inside, were already open.  By
degrees, other shops began to be unclosed, and a few scattered people
were met with.  Then, came straggling groups of labourers going to
their work; then, men and women with fish-baskets on their heads;
donkey-carts laden with vegetables; chaise-carts filled with live-stock
or whole carcasses of meat; milk-women with pails; an unbroken
concourse of people, trudging out with various supplies to the eastern
suburbs of the town.  As they approached the City, the noise and
traffic gradually increased; when they threaded the streets between
Shoreditch and Smithfield, it had swelled into a roar of sound and
bustle.  It was as light as it was likely to be, till night came on
again, and the busy morning of half the London population had begun.

Turning down Sun Street and Crown Street, and crossing Finsbury square,
Mr. Sikes struck, by way of Chiswell Street, into Barbican: thence into
Long Lane, and so into Smithfield; from which latter place arose a
tumult of discordant sounds that filled Oliver Twist with amazement.

It was market-morning.  The ground was covered, nearly ankle-deep, with
filth and mire; a thick steam, perpetually rising from the reeking
bodies of the cattle, and mingling with the fog, which seemed to rest
upon the chimney-tops, hung heavily above.  All the pens in the centre
of the large area, and as many temporary pens as could be crowded into
the vacant space, were filled with sheep; tied up to posts by the
gutter side were long lines of beasts and oxen, three or four deep.
Countrymen, butchers, drovers, hawkers, boys, thieves, idlers, and
vagabonds of every low grade, were mingled together in a mass; the
whistling of drovers, the barking dogs, the bellowing and plunging of
the oxen, the bleating of sheep, the grunting and squeaking of pigs,
the cries of hawkers, the shouts, oaths, and quarrelling on all sides;
the ringing of bells and roar of voices, that issued from every
public-house; the crowding, pushing, driving, beating, whooping and
yelling; the hideous and discordant dim that resounded from every
corner of the market; and the unwashed, unshaven, squalid, and dirty
figures constantly running to and fro, and bursting in and out of the
throng; rendered it a stunning and bewildering scene, which quite
confounded the senses.

Mr. Sikes, dragging Oliver after him, elbowed his way through the
thickest of the crowd, and bestowed very little attention on the
numerous sights and sounds, which so astonished the boy.  He nodded,
twice or thrice, to a passing friend; and, resisting as many
invitations to take a morning dram, pressed steadily onward, until they
were clear of the turmoil, and had made their way through Hosier Lane
into Holborn.

'Now, young 'un!' said Sikes, looking up at the clock of St. Andrew's
Church, 'hard upon seven! you must step out.  Come, don't lag behind
already, Lazy-legs!'

Mr. Sikes accompanied this speech with a jerk at his little companion's
wrist; Oliver, quickening his pace into a kind of trot between a fast
walk and a run, kept up with the rapid strides of the house-breaker as
well as he could.

They held their course at this rate, until they had passed Hyde Park
corner, and were on their way to Kensington:  when Sikes relaxed his
pace, until an empty cart which was at some little distance behind,
came up.  Seeing 'Hounslow' written on it, he asked the driver with as
much civility as he could assume, if he would give them a lift as far
as Isleworth.

'Jump up,' said the man.  'Is that your boy?'

'Yes; he's my boy,' replied Sikes, looking hard at Oliver, and putting
his hand abstractedly into the pocket where the pistol was.

'Your father walks rather too quick for you, don't he, my man?'
inquired the driver: seeing that Oliver was out of breath.

'Not a bit of it,' replied Sikes, interposing.  'He's used to it.

Here, take hold of my hand, Ned.  In with you!'

Thus addressing Oliver, he helped him into the cart; and the driver,
pointing to a heap of sacks, told him to lie down there, and rest
himself.

As they passed the different mile-stones, Oliver wondered, more and
more, where his companion meant to take him.  Kensington, Hammersmith,
Chiswick, Kew Bridge, Brentford, were all passed; and yet they went on
as steadily as if they had only just begun their journey.  At length,
they came to a public-house called the Coach and Horses; a little way
beyond which, another road appeared to run off.  And here, the cart
stopped.

Sikes dismounted with great precipitation, holding Oliver by the hand
all the while; and lifting him down directly, bestowed a furious look
upon him, and rapped the side-pocket with his fist, in a significant
manner.

'Good-bye, boy,' said the man.

'He's sulky,' replied Sikes, giving him a shake; 'he's sulky.  A young
dog!  Don't mind him.'

'Not I!' rejoined the other, getting into his cart.  'It's a fine day,
after all.'  And he drove away.

Sikes waited until he had fairly gone; and then, telling Oliver he
might look about him if he wanted, once again led him onward on his
journey.

They turned round to the left, a short way past the public-house; and
then, taking a right-hand road, walked on for a long time: passing many
large gardens and gentlemen's houses on both sides of the way, and
stopping for nothing but a little beer, until they reached a town.
Here against the wall of a house, Oliver saw written up in pretty large
letters, 'Hampton.'  They lingered about, in the fields, for some
hours.  At length they came back into the town; and, turning into an
old public-house with a defaced sign-board, ordered some dinner by the
kitchen fire.

The kitchen was an old, low-roofed room; with a great beam across the
middle of the ceiling, and benches, with high backs to them, by the
fire; on which were seated several rough men in smock-frocks, drinking
and smoking.  They took no notice of Oliver; and very little of Sikes;
and, as Sikes took very little notice of them, he and his young comrade
sat in a corner by themselves, without being much troubled by their
company.

They had some cold meat for dinner, and sat so long after it, while Mr.
Sikes indulged himself with three or four pipes, that Oliver began to
feel quite certain they were not going any further.  Being much tired
with the walk, and getting up so early, he dozed a little at first;
then, quite overpowered by fatigue and the fumes of the tobacco, fell
asleep.

It was quite dark when he was awakened by a push from Sikes. Rousing
himself sufficiently to sit up and look about him, he found that worthy
in close fellowship and communication with a labouring man, over a pint
of ale.

'So, you're going on to Lower Halliford, are you?' inquired Sikes.

'Yes, I am,' replied the man, who seemed a little the worse--or better,
as the case might be--for drinking; 'and not slow about it neither.  My
horse hasn't got a load behind him going back, as he had coming up in
the mornin'; and he won't be long a-doing of it.  Here's luck to him.
Ecod! he's a good 'un!'

'Could you give my boy and me a lift as far as there?' demanded Sikes,
pushing the ale towards his new friend.

'If you're going directly, I can,' replied the man, looking out of the
pot.  'Are you going to Halliford?'

'Going on to Shepperton,' replied Sikes.

'I'm your man, as far as I go,' replied the other.  'Is all paid,
Becky?'

'Yes, the other gentleman's paid,' replied the girl.

'I say!' said the man, with tipsy gravity; 'that won't do, you know.'

'Why not?' rejoined Sikes.  'You're a-going to accommodate us, and
wot's to prevent my standing treat for a pint or so, in return?'

The stranger reflected upon this argument, with a very profound face;
having done so, he seized Sikes by the hand:  and declared he was a
real good fellow.  To which Mr. Sikes replied, he was joking; as, if he
had been sober, there would have been strong reason to suppose he was.

After the exchange of a few more compliments, they bade the company
good-night, and went out; the girl gathering up the pots and glasses as
they did so, and lounging out to the door, with her hands full, to see
the party start.

The horse, whose health had been drunk in his absence, was standing
outside:  ready harnessed to the cart.  Oliver and Sikes got in without
any further ceremony; and the man to whom he belonged, having lingered
for a minute or two 'to bear him up,' and to defy the hostler and the
world to produce his equal, mounted also.  Then, the hostler was told
to give the horse his head; and, his head being given him, he made a
very unpleasant use of it:  tossing it into the air with great disdain,
and running into the parlour windows over the way; after performing
those feats, and supporting himself for a short time on his hind-legs,
he started off at great speed, and rattled out of the town right
gallantly.

The night was very dark.  A damp mist rose from the river, and the
marshy ground about; and spread itself over the dreary fields.  It was
piercing cold, too; all was gloomy and black. Not a word was spoken;
for the driver had grown sleepy; and Sikes was in no mood to lead him
into conversation.  Oliver sat huddled together, in a corner of the
cart; bewildered with alarm and apprehension; and figuring strange
objects in the gaunt trees, whose branches waved grimly to and fro, as
if in some fantastic joy at the desolation of the scene.

As they passed Sunbury Church, the clock struck seven.  There was a
light in the ferry-house window opposite:  which streamed across the
road, and threw into more sombre shadow a dark yew-tree with graves
beneath it.  There was a dull sound of falling water not far off; and
the leaves of the old tree stirred gently in the night wind.  It seemed
like quiet music for the repose of the dead.

Sunbury was passed through, and they came again into the lonely road.
Two or three miles more, and the cart stopped.  Sikes alighted, took
Oliver by the hand, and they once again walked on.

They turned into no house at Shepperton, as the weary boy had expected;
but still kept walking on, in mud and darkness, through gloomy lanes
and over cold open wastes, until they came within sight of the lights
of a town at no great distance.  On looking intently forward, Oliver
saw that the water was just below them, and that they were coming to
the foot of a bridge.

Sikes kept straight on, until they were close upon the bridge; then
turned suddenly down a bank upon the left.

'The water!' thought Oliver, turning sick with fear.  'He has brought
me to this lonely place to murder me!'

He was about to throw himself on the ground, and make one struggle for
his young life, when he saw that they stood before a solitary house:
all ruinous and decayed.  There was a window on each side of the
dilapidated entrance; and one story above; but no light was visible.
The house was dark, dismantled: and the all appearance, uninhabited.

Sikes, with Oliver's hand still in his, softly approached the low
porch, and raised the latch.  The door yielded to the pressure, and
they passed in together.



CHAPTER XXII

THE BURGLARY

'Hallo!' cried a loud, hoarse voice, as soon as they set foot in the
passage.

'Don't make such a row,' said Sikes, bolting the door.  'Show a glim,
Toby.'

'Aha! my pal!' cried the same voice.  'A glim, Barney, a glim! Show the
gentleman in, Barney; wake up first, if convenient.'

The speaker appeared to throw a boot-jack, or some such article, at the
person he addressed, to rouse him from his slumbers:  for the noise of
a wooden body, falling violently, was heard; and then an indistinct
muttering, as of a man between sleep and awake.

'Do you hear?' cried the same voice.  'There's Bill Sikes in the
passage with nobody to do the civil to him; and you sleeping there, as
if you took laudanum with your meals, and nothing stronger.  Are you
any fresher now, or do you want the iron candlestick to wake you
thoroughly?'

A pair of slipshod feet shuffled, hastily, across the bare floor of the
room, as this interrogatory was put; and there issued, from a door on
the right hand; first, a feeble candle:  and next, the form of the same
individual who has been heretofore described as labouring under the
infirmity of speaking through his nose, and officiating as waiter at
the public-house on Saffron Hill.

'Bister Sikes!' exclaimed Barney, with real or counterfeit joy; 'cub
id, sir; cub id.'

'Here! you get on first,' said Sikes, putting Oliver in front of him.
'Quicker! or I shall tread upon your heels.'

Muttering a curse upon his tardiness, Sikes pushed Oliver before him;
and they entered a low dark room with a smoky fire, two or three broken
chairs, a table, and a very old couch:  on which, with his legs much
higher than his head, a man was reposing at full length, smoking a long
clay pipe.  He was dressed in a smartly-cut snuff-coloured coat, with
large brass buttons; an orange neckerchief; a coarse, staring,
shawl-pattern waistcoat; and drab breeches.  Mr. Crackit (for he it
was) had no very great quantity of hair, either upon his head or face;
but what he had, was of a reddish dye, and tortured into long corkscrew
curls, through which he occasionally thrust some very dirty fingers,
ornamented with large common rings.  He was a trifle above the middle
size, and apparently rather weak in the legs; but this circumstance by
no means detracted from his own admiration of his top-boots, which he
contemplated, in their elevated situation, with lively satisfaction.

'Bill, my boy!' said this figure, turning his head towards the door,
'I'm glad to see you.  I was almost afraid you'd given it up:  in which
case I should have made a personal wentur.  Hallo!'

Uttering this exclamation in a tone of great surprise, as his eyes
rested on Oliver, Mr. Toby Crackit brought himself into a sitting
posture, and demanded who that was.

'The boy.  Only the boy!' replied Sikes, drawing a chair towards the
fire.

'Wud of Bister Fagid's lads,' exclaimed Barney, with a grin.

'Fagin's, eh!' exclaimed Toby, looking at Oliver.  'Wot an inwalable
boy that'll make, for the old ladies' pockets in chapels!  His mug is a
fortin' to him.'

'There--there's enough of that,' interposed Sikes, impatiently; and
stooping over his recumbant friend, he whispered a few words in his
ear:  at which Mr. Crackit laughed immensely, and honoured Oliver with
a long stare of astonishment.

'Now,' said Sikes, as he resumed his seat, 'if you'll give us something
to eat and drink while we're waiting, you'll put some heart in us; or
in me, at all events.  Sit down by the fire, younker, and rest
yourself; for you'll have to go out with us again to-night, though not
very far off.'

Oliver looked at Sikes, in mute and timid wonder; and drawing a stool
to the fire, sat with his aching head upon his hands, scarecely knowing
where he was, or what was passing around him.

'Here,' said Toby, as the young Jew placed some fragments of food, and
a bottle upon the table,  'Success to the crack!'  He rose to honour
the toast; and, carefully depositing his empty pipe in a corner,
advanced to the table, filled a glass with spirits, and drank off its
contents.  Mr. Sikes did the same.

'A drain for the boy,' said Toby, half-filling a wine-glass. 'Down with
it, innocence.'

'Indeed,' said Oliver, looking piteously up into the man's face;
'indeed, I--'

'Down with it!' echoed Toby.  'Do you think I don't know what's good
for you?  Tell him to drink it, Bill.'

'He had better!' said Sikes clapping his hand upon his pocket. 'Burn my
body, if he isn't more trouble than a whole family of Dodgers.  Drink
it, you perwerse imp; drink it!'

Frightened by the menacing gestures of the two men, Oliver hastily
swallowed the contents of the glass, and immediately fell into a
violent fit of coughing:  which delighted Toby Crackit and Barney, and
even drew a smile from the surly Mr. Sikes.

This done, and Sikes having satisfied his appetite (Oliver could eat
nothing but a small crust of bread which they made him swallow), the
two men laid themselves down on chairs for a short nap.  Oliver
retained his stool by the fire; Barney wrapped in a blanket, stretched
himself on the floor:  close outside the fender.

They slept, or appeared to sleep, for some time; nobody stirring but
Barney, who rose once or twice to throw coals on the fire. Oliver fell
into a heavy doze:  imagining himself straying along the gloomy lanes,
or wandering about the dark churchyard, or retracing some one or other
of the scenes of the past day:  when he was roused by Toby Crackit
jumping up and declaring it was half-past one.

In an instant, the other two were on their legs, and all were actively
engaged in busy preparation.  Sikes and his companion enveloped their
necks and chins in large dark shawls, and drew on their great-coats;
Barney, opening a cupboard, brought forth several articles, which he
hastily crammed into the pockets.

'Barkers for me, Barney,' said Toby Crackit.

'Here they are,' replied Barney, producing a pair of pistols. 'You
loaded them yourself.'

'All right!' replied Toby, stowing them away.  'The persuaders?'

'I've got 'em,' replied Sikes.

'Crape, keys, centre-bits, darkies--nothing forgotten?' inquired Toby:
fastening a small crowbar to a loop inside the skirt of his coat.

'All right,' rejoined his companion.  'Bring them bits of timber,
Barney.  That's the time of day.'

With these words, he took a thick stick from Barney's hands, who,
having delivered another to Toby, busied himself in fastening on
Oliver's cape.

'Now then!' said Sikes, holding out his hand.

Oliver:  who was completely stupified by the unwonted exercise, and the
air, and the drink which had been forced upon him:  put his hand
mechanically into that which Sikes extended for the purpose.

'Take his other hand, Toby,' said Sikes.  'Look out, Barney.'

The man went to the door, and returned to announce that all was quiet.
The two robbers issued forth with Oliver between them. Barney, having
made all fast, rolled himself up as before, and was soon asleep again.

It was now intensely dark.  The fog was much heavier than it had been
in the early part of the night; and the atmosphere was so damp, that,
although no rain fell, Oliver's hair and eyebrows, within a few minutes
after leaving the house, had become stiff with the half-frozen moisture
that was floating about.  They crossed the bridge, and kept on towards
the lights which he had seen before.  They were at no great distance
off; and, as they walked pretty briskly, they soon arrived at Chertsey.

'Slap through the town,' whispered Sikes; 'there'll be nobody in the
way, to-night, to see us.'

Toby acquiesced; and they hurried through the main street of the little
town, which at that late hour was wholly deserted.  A dim light shone
at intervals from some bed-room window; and the hoarse barking of dogs
occasionally broke the silence of the night.  But there was nobody
abroad.  They had cleared the town, as the church-bell struck two.

Quickening their pace, they turned up a road upon the left hand. After
walking about a quarter of a mile, they stopped before a detached house
surrounded by a wall:  to the top of which, Toby Crackit, scarcely
pausing to take breath, climbed in a twinkling.

'The boy next,' said Toby.  'Hoist him up; I'll catch hold of him.'

Before Oliver had time to look round, Sikes had caught him under the
arms; and in three or four seconds he and Toby were lying on the grass
on the other side.  Sikes followed directly.  And they stole cautiously
towards the house.

And now, for the first time, Oliver, well-nigh mad with grief and
terror, saw that housebreaking and robbery, if not murder, were the
objects of the expedition.  He clasped his hands together, and
involuntarily uttered a subdued exclamation of horror.  A mist came
before his eyes; the cold sweat stood upon his ashy face; his limbs
failed him; and he sank upon his knees.

'Get up!' murmured Sikes, trembling with rage, and drawing the pistol
from his pocket; 'Get up, or I'll strew your brains upon the grass.'

'Oh! for God's sake let me go!' cried Oliver; 'let me run away and die
in the fields.  I will never come near London; never, never!  Oh! pray
have mercy on me, and do not make me steal.  For the love of all the
bright Angels that rest in Heaven, have mercy upon me!'

The man to whom this appeal was made, swore a dreadful oath, and had
cocked the pistol, when Toby, striking it from his grasp, placed his
hand upon the boy's mouth, and dragged him to the house.

'Hush!' cried the man; 'it won't answer here.  Say another word, and
I'll do your business myself with a crack on the head.  That makes no
noise, and is quite as certain, and more genteel.  Here, Bill, wrench
the shutter open.  He's game enough now, I'll engage.  I've seen older
hands of his age took the same way, for a minute or two, on a cold
night.'

Sikes, invoking terrific imprecations upon Fagin's head for sending
Oliver on such an errand, plied the crowbar vigorously, but with little
noise.  After some delay, and some assistance from Toby, the shutter to
which he had referred, swung open on its hinges.

It was a little lattice window, about five feet and a half above the
ground, at the back of the house:  which belonged to a scullery, or
small brewing-place, at the end of the passage.  The aperture was so
small, that the inmates had probably not thought it worth while to
defend it more securely; but it was large enough to admit a boy of
Oliver's size, nevertheless.  A very brief exercise of Mr. Sike's art,
sufficed to overcome the fastening of the lattice; and it soon stood
wide open also.

'Now listen, you young limb,' whispered Sikes, drawing a dark lantern
from his pocket, and throwing the glare full on Oliver's face; 'I'm a
going to put you through there.  Take this light; go softly up the
steps straight afore you, and along the little hall, to the street
door; unfasten it, and let us in.'

'There's a bolt at the top, you won't be able to reach,' interposed
Toby. 'Stand upon one of the hall chairs.  There are three there, Bill,
with a jolly large blue unicorn and gold pitchfork on 'em:  which is
the old lady's arms.'

'Keep quiet, can't you?' replied Sikes, with a threatening look. 'The
room-door is open, is it?'

'Wide,' replied Toby, after peeping in to satisfy himself. 'The game of
that is, that they always leave it open with a catch, so that the dog,
who's got a bed in here, may walk up and down the passage when he feels
wakeful.  Ha! ha! Barney 'ticed him away to-night.  So neat!'

Although Mr. Crackit spoke in a scarcely audible whisper, and laughed
without noise, Sikes imperiously commanded him to be silent, and to get
to work.  Toby complied, by first producing his lantern, and placing it
on the ground; then by planting himself firmly with his head against
the wall beneath the window, and his hands upon his knees, so as to
make a step of his back. This was no sooner done, than Sikes, mounting
upon him, put Oliver gently through the window with his feet first;
and, without leaving hold of his collar, planted him safely on the
floor inside.

'Take this lantern,' said Sikes, looking into the room.  'You see the
stairs afore you?'

Oliver, more dead than alive, gasped out, 'Yes.'  Sikes, pointing to
the street-door with the pistol-barrel, briefly advised him to take
notice that he was within shot all the way; and that if he faltered, he
would fall dead that instant.

'It's done in a minute,' said Sikes, in the same low whisper. 'Directly
I leave go of you, do your work.  Hark!'

'What's that?' whispered the other man.

They listened intently.

'Nothing,' said Sikes, releasing his hold of Oliver.  'Now!'

In the short time he had had to collect his senses, the boy had firmly
resolved that, whether he died in the attempt or not, he would make one
effort to dart upstairs from the hall, and alarm the family.  Filled
with this idea, he advanced at once, but stealthily.

'Come back!' suddenly cried Sikes aloud.  'Back! back!'

Scared by the sudden breaking of the dead stillness of the place, and
by a loud cry which followed it, Oliver let his lantern fall, and knew
not whether to advance or fly.

The cry was repeated--a light appeared--a vision of two terrified
half-dressed men at the top of the stairs swam before his eyes--a
flash--a loud noise--a smoke--a crash somewhere, but where he knew
not,--and he staggered back.

Sikes had disappeared for an instant; but he was up again, and had him
by the collar before the smoke had cleared away.  He fired his own
pistol after the men, who were already retreating; and dragged the boy
up.

'Clasp your arm tighter,' said Sikes, as he drew him through the
window.  'Give me a shawl here.  They've hit him.  Quick!  How the boy
bleeds!'

Then came the loud ringing of a bell, mingled with the noise of
fire-arms, and the shouts of men, and the sensation of being carried
over uneven ground at a rapid pace.  And then, the noises grew confused
in the distance; and a cold deadly feeling crept over the boy's heart;
and he saw or heard no more.



CHAPTER XXIII

WHICH CONTAINS THE SUBSTANCE OF A PLEASANT CONVERSATION BETWEEN MR.
BUMBLE AND A LADY; AND SHOWS THAT EVEN A BEADLE MAY BE SUSCEPTIBLE ON
SOME POINTS

The night was bitter cold.  The snow lay on the ground, frozen into a
hard thick crust, so that only the heaps that had drifted into byways
and corners were affected by the sharp wind that howled abroad:  which,
as if expending increased fury on such prey as it found, caught it
savagely up in clouds, and, whirling it into a thousand misty eddies,
scattered it in air.  Bleak, dark, and piercing cold, it was a night
for the well-housed and fed to draw round the bright fire and thank God
they were at home; and for the homeless, starving wretch to lay him
down and die.  Many hunger-worn outcasts close their eyes in our bare
streets, at such times, who, let their crimes have been what they may,
can hardly open them in a more bitter world.

Such was the aspect of out-of-doors affairs, when Mrs. Corney, the
matron of the workhouse to which our readers have been already
introduced as the birthplace of Oliver Twist, sat herself down before a
cheerful fire in her own little room, and glanced, with no small degree
of complacency, at a small round table:  on which stood a tray of
corresponding size, furnished with all necessary materials for the most
grateful meal that matrons enjoy.  In fact, Mrs. Corney was about to
solace herself with a cup of tea. As she glanced from the table to the
fireplace, where the smallest of all possible kettles was singing a
small song in a small voice, her inward satisfaction evidently
increased,--so much so, indeed, that Mrs. Corney smiled.

'Well!' said the matron, leaning her elbow on the table, and looking
reflectively at the fire; 'I'm sure we have all on us a great deal to
be grateful for!  A great deal, if we did but know it.  Ah!'

Mrs. Corney shook her head mournfully, as if deploring the mental
blindness of those paupers who did not know it; and thrusting a silver
spoon (private property) into the inmost recesses of a two-ounce tin
tea-caddy, proceeded to make the tea.

How slight a thing will disturb the equanimity of our frail minds!  The
black teapot, being very small and easily filled, ran over while Mrs.
Corney was moralising; and the water slightly scalded Mrs. Corney's
hand.

'Drat the pot!' said the worthy matron, setting it down very hastily on
the hob; 'a little stupid thing, that only holds a couple of cups!
What use is it of, to anybody!  Except,' said Mrs. Corney, pausing,
'except to a poor desolate creature like me.  Oh dear!'

With these words, the matron dropped into her chair, and, once more
resting her elbow on the table, thought of her solitary fate.  The
small teapot, and the single cup, had awakened in her mind sad
recollections of Mr. Corney (who had not been dead more than
five-and-twenty years); and she was overpowered.

'I shall never get another!' said Mrs. Corney, pettishly; 'I shall
never get another--like him.'

Whether this remark bore reference to the husband, or the teapot, is
uncertain.  It might have been the latter; for Mrs. Corney looked at it
as she spoke; and took it up afterwards.  She had just tasted her first
cup, when she was disturbed by a soft tap at the room-door.

'Oh, come in with you!' said Mrs. Corney, sharply.  'Some of the old
women dying, I suppose.  They always die when I'm at meals. Don't stand
there, letting the cold air in, don't.  What's amiss now, eh?'

'Nothing, ma'am, nothing,' replied a man's voice.

'Dear me!' exclaimed the matron, in a much sweeter tone, 'is that Mr.
Bumble?'

'At your service, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble, who had been stopping
outside to rub his shoes clean, and to shake the snow off his coat; and
who now made his appearance, bearing the cocked hat in one hand and a
bundle in the other.  'Shall I shut the door, ma'am?'

The lady modestly hesitated to reply, lest there should be any
impropriety in holding an interview with Mr. Bumble, with closed doors.
Mr. Bumble taking advantage of the hesitation, and being very cold
himself, shut it without permission.

'Hard weather, Mr. Bumble,' said the matron.

'Hard, indeed, ma'am,' replied the beadle.  'Anti-porochial weather
this, ma'am.  We have given away, Mrs. Corney, we have given away a
matter of twenty quartern loaves and a cheese and a half, this very
blessed afternoon; and yet them paupers are not contented.'

'Of course not.  When would they be, Mr. Bumble?' said the matron,
sipping her tea.

'When, indeed, ma'am!' rejoined Mr. Bumble.  'Why here's one man that,
in consideration of his wife and large family, has a quartern loaf and
a good pound of cheese, full weight.  Is he grateful, ma'am?  Is he
grateful?  Not a copper farthing's worth of it!  What does he do,
ma'am, but ask for a few coals; if it's only a pocket handkerchief
full, he says!  Coals! What would he do with coals?  Toast his cheese
with 'em and then come back for more.  That's the way with these
people, ma'am; give 'em a apron full of coals to-day, and they'll come
back for another, the day after to-morrow, as brazen as alabaster.'

The matron expressed her entire concurrence in this intelligible
simile; and the beadle went on.

'I never,' said Mr. Bumble, 'see anything like the pitch it's got to.
The day afore yesterday, a man--you have been a married woman, ma'am,
and I may mention it to you--a man, with hardly a rag upon his back
(here Mrs. Corney looked at the floor), goes to our overseer's door
when he has got company coming to dinner; and says, he must be
relieved, Mrs. Corney.  As he wouldn't go away, and shocked the company
very much, our overseer sent him out a pound of potatoes and half a
pint of oatmeal.  "My heart!" says the ungrateful villain, "what's the
use of _this_ to me?  You might as well give me a pair of iron
spectacles!"  "Very good," says our overseer, taking 'em away again,
"you won't get anything else here."  "Then I'll die in the streets!"
says the vagrant.  "Oh no, you won't," says our overseer.'

'Ha! ha!  That was very good!  So like Mr. Grannett, wasn't it?'
interposed the matron.  'Well, Mr. Bumble?'

'Well, ma'am,' rejoined the beadle, 'he went away; and he _did_ die in
the streets.  There's a obstinate pauper for you!'

'It beats anything I could have believed,' observed the matron
emphatically.  'But don't you think out-of-door relief a very bad
thing, any way, Mr. Bumble?  You're a gentleman of experience, and
ought to know.  Come.'

'Mrs. Corney,' said the beadle, smiling as men smile who are conscious
of superior information, 'out-of-door relief, properly managed:
properly managed, ma'am: is the porochial safeguard.  The great
principle of out-of-door relief is, to give the paupers exactly what
they don't want; and then they get tired of coming.'

'Dear me!' exclaimed Mrs. Corney.  'Well, that is a good one, too!'

'Yes.  Betwixt you and me, ma'am,' returned Mr. Bumble, 'that's the
great principle; and that's the reason why, if you look at any cases
that get into them owdacious newspapers, you'll always observe that
sick families have been relieved with slices of cheese.  That's the
rule now, Mrs. Corney, all over the country. But, however,' said the
beadle, stopping to unpack his bundle, 'these are official secrets,
ma'am; not to be spoken of; except, as I may say, among the porochial
officers, such as ourselves. This is the port wine, ma'am, that the
board ordered for the infirmary; real, fresh, genuine port wine; only
out of the cask this forenoon; clear as a bell, and no sediment!'

Having held the first bottle up to the light, and shaken it well to
test its excellence, Mr. Bumble placed them both on top of a chest of
drawers; folded the handkerchief in which they had been wrapped; put it
carefully in his pocket; and took up his hat, as if to go.

'You'll have a very cold walk, Mr. Bumble,' said the matron.

'It blows, ma'am,' replied Mr. Bumble, turning up his coat-collar,
'enough to cut one's ears off.'

The matron looked, from the little kettle, to the beadle, who was
moving towards the door; and as the beadle coughed, preparatory to
bidding her good-night, bashfully inquired whether--whether he wouldn't
take a cup of tea?

Mr. Bumble instantaneously turned back his collar again; laid his hat
and stick upon a chair; and drew another chair up to the table.  As he
slowly seated himself, he looked at the lady.  She fixed her eyes upon
the little teapot.  Mr. Bumble coughed again, and slightly smiled.

Mrs. Corney rose to get another cup and saucer from the closet. As she
sat down, her eyes once again encountered those of the gallant beadle;
she coloured, and applied herself to the task of making his tea.  Again
Mr. Bumble coughed--louder this time than he had coughed yet.

'Sweet?  Mr. Bumble?' inquired the matron, taking up the sugar-basin.

'Very sweet, indeed, ma'am,' replied Mr. Bumble.  He fixed his eyes on
Mrs. Corney as he said this; and if ever a beadle looked tender, Mr.
Bumble was that beadle at that moment.

The tea was made, and handed in silence.  Mr. Bumble, having spread a
handkerchief over his knees to prevent the crumbs from sullying the
splendour of his shorts, began to eat and drink; varying these
amusements, occasionally, by fetching a deep sigh; which, however, had
no injurious effect upon his appetite, but, on the contrary, rather
seemed to facilitate his operations in the tea and toast department.

'You have a cat, ma'am, I see,' said Mr. Bumble, glancing at one who,
in the centre of her family, was basking before the fire; 'and kittens
too, I declare!'

'I am so fond of them, Mr. Bumble, you can't think,' replied the
matron.  'They're _so_ happy, _so_ frolicsome, and _so_ cheerful, that
they are quite companions for me.'

'Very nice animals, ma'am,' replied Mr. Bumble, approvingly; 'so very
domestic.'

'Oh, yes!' rejoined the matron with enthusiasm; 'so fond of their home
too, that it's quite a pleasure, I'm sure.'

'Mrs. Corney, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble, slowly, and marking the time
with his teaspoon, 'I mean to say this, ma'am; that any cat, or kitten,
that could live with you, ma'am, and _not_ be fond of its home, must be
a ass, ma'am.'

'Oh, Mr. Bumble!' remonstrated Mrs. Corney.

'It's of no use disguising facts, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble, slowly
flourishing the teaspoon with a kind of amorous dignity which made him
doubly impressive; 'I would drown it myself, with pleasure.'

'Then you're a cruel man,' said the matron vivaciously, as she held out
her hand for the beadle's cup; 'and a very hard-hearted man besides.'

'Hard-hearted, ma'am?' said Mr. Bumble.  'Hard?'  Mr. Bumble resigned
his cup without another word; squeezed Mrs. Corney's little finger as
she took it; and inflicting two open-handed slaps upon his laced
waistcoat, gave a mighty sigh, and hitched his chair a very little
morsel farther from the fire.

It was a round table; and as Mrs. Corney and Mr. Bumble had been
sitting opposite each other, with no great space between them, and
fronting the fire, it will be seen that Mr. Bumble, in receding from
the fire, and still keeping at the table, increased the distance
between himself and Mrs. Corney; which proceeding, some prudent readers
will doubtless be disposed to admire, and to consider an act of great
heroism on Mr. Bumble's part:  he being in some sort tempted by time,
place, and opportunity, to give utterance to certain soft nothings,
which however well they may become the lips of the light and
thoughtless, do seem immeasurably beneath the dignity of judges of the
land, members of parliament, ministers of state, lord mayors, and other
great public functionaries, but more particularly beneath the
stateliness and gravity of a beadle:  who (as is well known) should be
the sternest and most inflexible among them all.

Whatever were Mr. Bumble's intentions, however (and no doubt they were
of the best): it unfortunately happened, as has been twice before
remarked, that the table was a round one; consequently Mr. Bumble,
moving his chair by little and little, soon began to diminish the
distance between himself and the matron; and, continuing to travel
round the outer edge of the circle, brought his chair, in time, close
to that in which the matron was seated.

Indeed, the two chairs touched; and when they did so, Mr. Bumble
stopped.

Now, if the matron had moved her chair to the right, she would have
been scorched by the fire; and if to the left, she must have fallen
into Mr. Bumble's arms; so (being a discreet matron, and no doubt
foreseeing these consequences at a glance) she remained where she was,
and handed Mr. Bumble another cup of tea.

'Hard-hearted, Mrs. Corney?' said Mr. Bumble, stirring his tea, and
looking up into the matron's face; 'are _you_ hard-hearted, Mrs.
Corney?'

'Dear me!' exclaimed the matron, 'what a very curious question from a
single man.  What can you want to know for, Mr. Bumble?'

The beadle drank his tea to the last drop; finished a piece of toast;
whisked the crumbs off his knees; wiped his lips; and deliberately
kissed the matron.

'Mr. Bumble!' cried that discreet lady in a whisper; for the fright was
so great, that she had quite lost her voice, 'Mr. Bumble, I shall
scream!'  Mr. Bumble made no reply; but in a slow and dignified manner,
put his arm round the matron's waist.

As the lady had stated her intention of screaming, of course she would
have screamed at this additional boldness, but that the exertion was
rendered unnecessary by a hasty knocking at the door:  which was no
sooner heard, than Mr. Bumble darted, with much agility, to the wine
bottles, and began dusting them with great violence:  while the matron
sharply demanded who was there.

It is worthy of remark, as a curious physical instance of the efficacy
of a sudden surprise in counteracting the effects of extreme fear, that
her voice had quite recovered all its official asperity.

'If you please, mistress,' said a withered old female pauper, hideously
ugly:  putting her head in at the door, 'Old Sally is a-going fast.'

'Well, what's that to me?' angrily demanded the matron.  'I can't keep
her alive, can I?'

'No, no, mistress,' replied the old woman, 'nobody can; she's far
beyond the reach of help.  I've seen a many people die; little babes
and great strong men; and I know when death's a-coming, well enough.
But she's troubled in her mind: and when the fits are not on her,--and
that's not often, for she is dying very hard,--she says she has got
something to tell, which you must hear.  She'll never die quiet till
you come, mistress.'

At this intelligence, the worthy Mrs. Corney muttered a variety of
invectives against old women who couldn't even die without purposely
annoying their betters; and, muffling herself in a thick shawl which
she hastily caught up, briefly requested Mr. Bumble to stay till she
came back, lest anything particular should occur.  Bidding the
messenger walk fast, and not be all night hobbling up the stairs, she
followed her from the room with a very ill grace, scolding all the way.

Mr. Bumble's conduct on being left to himself, was rather inexplicable.
He opened the closet, counted the teaspoons, weighed the sugar-tongs,
closely inspected a silver milk-pot to ascertain that it was of the
genuine metal, and, having satisfied his curiosity on these points, put
on his cocked hat corner-wise, and danced with much gravity four
distinct times round the table.

Having gone through this very extraordinary performance, he took off
the cocked hat again, and, spreading himself before the fire with his
back towards it, seemed to be mentally engaged in taking an exact
inventory of the furniture.



CHAPTER XXIV

TREATS ON A VERY POOR SUBJECT.  BUT IS A SHORT ONE, AND MAY BE FOUND OF
IMPORTANCE IN THIS HISTORY

It was no unfit messenger of death, who had disturbed the quiet of the
matron's room.  Her body was bent by age; her limbs trembled with
palsy; her face, distorted into a mumbling leer, resembled more the
grotesque shaping of some wild pencil, than the work of Nature's hand.

Alas!  How few of Nature's faces are left alone to gladden us with
their beauty!  The cares, and sorrows, and hungerings, of the world,
change them as they change hearts; and it is only when those passions
sleep, and have lost their hold for ever, that the troubled clouds pass
off, and leave Heaven's surface clear.  It is a common thing for the
countenances of the dead, even in that fixed and rigid state, to
subside into the long-forgotten expression of sleeping infancy, and
settle into the very look of early life; so calm, so peaceful, do they
grow again, that those who knew them in their happy childhood, kneel by
the coffin's side in awe, and see the Angel even upon earth.

The old crone tottered along the passages, and up the stairs, muttering
some indistinct answers to the chidings of her companion; being at
length compelled to pause for breath, she gave the light into her hand,
and remained behind to follow as she might: while the more nimble
superior made her way to the room where the sick woman lay.

It was a bare garret-room, with a dim light burning at the farther end.
There was another old woman watching by the bed; the parish
apothecary's apprentice was standing by the fire, making a toothpick
out of a quill.

'Cold night, Mrs. Corney,' said this young gentleman, as the matron
entered.

'Very cold, indeed, sir,' replied the mistress, in her most civil
tones, and dropping a curtsey as she spoke.

'You should get better coals out of your contractors,' said the
apothecary's deputy, breaking a lump on the top of the fire with the
rusty poker; 'these are not at all the sort of thing for a cold night.'

'They're the board's choosing, sir,' returned the matron. 'The least
they could do, would be to keep us pretty warm:  for our places are
hard enough.'

The conversation was here interrupted by a moan from the sick woman.

'Oh!' said the young mag, turning his face towards the bed, as if he
had previously quite forgotten the patient, 'it's all U.P. there, Mrs.
Corney.'

'It is, is it, sir?' asked the matron.

'If she lasts a couple of hours, I shall be surprised,' said the
apothecary's apprentice, intent upon the toothpick's point. 'It's a
break-up of the system altogether.  Is she dozing, old lady?'

The attendant stooped over the bed, to ascertain; and nodded in the
affirmative.

'Then perhaps she'll go off in that way, if you don't make a row,' said
the young man.  'Put the light on the floor.  She won't see it there.'

The attendant did as she was told:  shaking her head meanwhile, to
intimate that the woman would not die so easily; having done so, she
resumed her seat by the side of the other nurse, who had by this time
returned.  The mistress, with an expression of impatience, wrapped
herself in her shawl, and sat at the foot of the bed.

The apothecary's apprentice, having completed the manufacture of the
toothpick, planted himself in front of the fire and made good use of it
for ten minutes or so:  when apparently growing rather dull, he wished
Mrs. Corney joy of her job, and took himself off on tiptoe.

When they had sat in silence for some time, the two old women rose from
the bed, and crouching over the fire, held out their withered hands to
catch the heat.  The flame threw a ghastly light on their shrivelled
faces, and made their ugliness appear terrible, as, in this position,
they began to converse in a low voice.

'Did she say any more, Anny dear, while I was gone?' inquired the
messenger.

'Not a word,' replied the other.  'She plucked and tore at her arms for
a little time; but I held her hands, and she soon dropped off.  She
hasn't much strength in her, so I easily kept her quiet.  I ain't so
weak for an old woman, although I am on parish allowance; no, no!'

'Did she drink the hot wine the doctor said she was to have?' demanded
the first.

'I tried to get it down,' rejoined the other.  'But her teeth were
tight set, and she clenched the mug so hard that it was as much as I
could do to get it back again.  So I drank it; and it did me good!'

Looking cautiously round, to ascertain that they were not overheard,
the two hags cowered nearer to the fire, and chuckled heartily.

'I mind the time,' said the first speaker, 'when she would have done
the same, and made rare fun of it afterwards.'

'Ay, that she would,' rejoined the other; 'she had a merry heart. 'A
many, many, beautiful corpses she laid out, as nice and neat as
waxwork.  My old eyes have seen them--ay, and those old hands touched
them too; for I have helped her, scores of times.'

Stretching forth her trembling fingers as she spoke, the old creature
shook them exultingly before her face, and fumbling in her pocket,
brought out an old time-discoloured tin snuff-box, from which she shook
a few grains into the outstretched palm of her companion, and a few
more into her own.  While they were thus employed, the matron, who had
been impatiently watching until the dying woman should awaken from her
stupor, joined them by the fire, and sharply asked how long she was to
wait?

'Not long, mistress,' replied the second woman, looking up into her
face.  'We have none of us long to wait for Death.  Patience, patience!
He'll be here soon enough for us all.'

'Hold your tongue, you doting idiot!' said the matron sternly. 'You,
Martha, tell me; has she been in this way before?'

'Often,' answered the first woman.

'But will never be again,' added the second one; 'that is, she'll never
wake again but once--and mind, mistress, that won't be for long!'

'Long or short,' said the matron, snappishly, 'she won't find me here
when she does wake; take care, both of you, how you worry me again for
nothing.  It's no part of my duty to see all the old women in the house
die, and I won't--that's more. Mind that, you impudent old harridans.
If you make a fool of me again, I'll soon cure you, I warrant you!'

She was bouncing away, when a cry from the two women, who had turned
towards the bed, caused her to look round.  The patient had raised
herself upright, and was stretching her arms towards them.

'Who's that?' she cried, in a hollow voice.

'Hush, hush!' said one of the women, stooping over her.  'Lie down, lie
down!'

'I'll never lie down again alive!' said the woman, struggling. 'I
_will_ tell her!  Come here!  Nearer!  Let me whisper in your ear.'

She clutched the matron by the arm, and forcing her into a chair by the
bedside, was about to speak, when looking round, she caught sight of
the two old women bending forward in the attitude of eager listeners.

'Turn them away,' said the woman, drowsily; 'make haste! make haste!'

The two old crones, chiming in together, began pouring out many piteous
lamentations that the poor dear was too far gone to know her best
friends; and were uttering sundry protestations that they would never
leave her, when the superior pushed them from the room, closed the
door, and returned to the bedside.  On being excluded, the old ladies
changed their tone, and cried through the keyhole that old Sally was
drunk; which, indeed, was not unlikely; since, in addition to a
moderate dose of opium prescribed by the apothecary, she was labouring
under the effects of a final taste of gin-and-water which had been
privily administered, in the openness of their hearts, by the worthy
old ladies themselves.

'Now listen to me,' said the dying woman aloud, as if making a great
effort to revive one latent spark of energy.  'In this very room--in
this very bed--I once nursed a pretty young creetur', that was brought
into the house with her feet cut and bruised with walking, and all
soiled with dust and blood.  She gave birth to a boy, and died.  Let me
think--what was the year again!'

'Never mind the year,' said the impatient auditor; 'what about her?'

'Ay,' murmured the sick woman, relapsing into her former drowsy state,
'what about her?--what about--I know!' she cried, jumping fiercely up:
her face flushed, and her eyes starting from her head--'I robbed her,
so I did!  She wasn't cold--I tell you she wasn't cold, when I stole
it!'

'Stole what, for God's sake?' cried the matron, with a gesture as if
she would call for help.

'_It_!' replied the woman, laying her hand over the other's mouth. 'The
only thing she had.  She wanted clothes to keep her warm, and food to
eat; but she had kept it safe, and had it in her bosom.  It was gold, I
tell you!  Rich gold, that might have saved her life!'

'Gold!' echoed the matron, bending eagerly over the woman as she fell
back.  'Go on, go on--yes--what of it?  Who was the mother? When was
it?'

'She charged me to keep it safe,' replied the woman with a groan, 'and
trusted me as the only woman about her.  I stole it in my heart when
she first showed it me hanging round her neck; and the child's death,
perhaps, is on me besides!  They would have treated him better, if they
had known it all!'

'Known what?' asked the other.  'Speak!'

'The boy grew so like his mother,' said the woman, rambling on, and not
heeding the question, 'that I could never forget it when I saw his
face.  Poor girl! poor girl!  She was so young, too! Such a gentle
lamb!  Wait; there's more to tell.  I have not told you all, have I?'

'No, no,' replied the matron, inclining her head to catch the words, as
they came more faintly from the dying woman.  'Be quick, or it may be
too late!'

'The mother,' said the woman, making a more violent effort than before;
'the mother, when the pains of death first came upon her, whispered in
my ear that if her baby was born alive, and thrived, the day might come
when it would not feel so much disgraced to hear its poor young mother
named. "And oh, kind Heaven!" she said, folding her thin hands
together, "whether it be boy or girl, raise up some friends for it in
this troubled world, and take pity upon a lonely desolate child,
abandoned to its mercy!"'

'The boy's name?' demanded the matron.

'They _called_ him Oliver,' replied the woman, feebly.  'The gold I
stole was--'

'Yes, yes--what?' cried the other.

She was bending eagerly over the woman to hear her reply; but drew
back, instinctively, as she once again rose, slowly and stiffly, into a
sitting posture; then, clutching the coverlid with both hands, muttered
some indistinct sounds in her throat, and fell lifeless on the bed.

      *      *      *      *      *

'Stone dead!' said one of the old women, hurrying in as soon as the
door was opened.

'And nothing to tell, after all,' rejoined the matron, walking
carelessly away.

The two crones, to all appearance, too busily occupied in the
preparations for their dreadful duties to make any reply, were left
alone, hovering about the body.



CHAPTER XXV

WHEREIN THIS HISTORY REVERTS TO MR. FAGIN AND COMPANY

While these things were passing in the country workhouse, Mr. Fagin sat
in the old den--the same from which Oliver had been removed by the
girl--brooding over a dull, smoky fire.  He held a pair of bellows upon
his knee, with which he had apparently been endeavouring to rouse it
into more cheerful action; but he had fallen into deep thought; and
with his arms folded on them, and his chin resting on his thumbs, fixed
his eyes, abstractedly, on the rusty bars.

At a table behind him sat the Artful Dodger, Master Charles Bates, and
Mr. Chitling: all intent upon a game of whist; the Artful taking dummy
against Master Bates and Mr. Chitling.  The countenance of the
first-named gentleman, peculiarly intelligent at all times, acquired
great additional interest from his close observance of the game, and
his attentive perusal of Mr. Chitling's hand; upon which, from time to
time, as occasion served, he bestowed a variety of earnest glances:
wisely regulating his own play by the result of his observations upon
his neighbour's cards.  It being a cold night, the Dodger wore his hat,
as, indeed, was often his custom within doors.  He also sustained a
clay pipe between his teeth, which he only removed for a brief space
when he deemed it necessary to apply for refreshment to a quart pot
upon the table, which stood ready filled with gin-and-water for the
accommodation of the company.

Master Bates was also attentive to the play; but being of a more
excitable nature than his accomplished friend, it was observable that
he more frequently applied himself to the gin-and-water, and moreover
indulged in many jests and irrelevant remarks, all highly unbecoming a
scientific rubber.  Indeed, the Artful, presuming upon their close
attachment, more than once took occasion to reason gravely with his
companion upon these improprieties; all of which remonstrances, Master
Bates received in extremely good part; merely requesting his friend to
be 'blowed,' or to insert his head in a sack, or replying with some
other neatly-turned witticism of a similar kind, the happy application
of which, excited considerable admiration in the mind of Mr. Chitling.
It was remarkable that the latter gentleman and his partner invariably
lost; and that the circumstance, so far from angering Master Bates,
appeared to afford him the highest amusement, inasmuch as he laughed
most uproariously at the end of every deal, and protested that he had
never seen such a jolly game in all his born days.

'That's two doubles and the rub,' said Mr. Chitling, with a very long
face, as he drew half-a-crown from his waistcoat-pocket.  'I never see
such a feller as you, Jack; you win everything.  Even when we've good
cards, Charley and I can't make nothing of 'em.'

Either the master or the manner of this remark, which was made very
ruefully, delighted Charley Bates so much, that his consequent shout of
laughter roused the Jew from his reverie, and induced him to inquire
what was the matter.

'Matter, Fagin!' cried Charley.  'I wish you had watched the play.
Tommy Chitling hasn't won a point; and I went partners with him against
the Artfull and dumb.'

'Ay, ay!' said the Jew, with a grin, which sufficiently demonstrated
that he was at no loss to understand the reason. 'Try 'em again, Tom;
try 'em again.'

'No more of it for me, thank 'ee, Fagin,' replied Mr. Chitling; 'I've
had enough.  That 'ere Dodger has such a run of luck that there's no
standing again' him.'

'Ha! ha! my dear,' replied the Jew, 'you must get up very early in the
morning, to win against the Dodger.'

'Morning!' said Charley Bates; 'you must put your boots on over-night,
and have a telescope at each eye, and a opera-glass between your
shoulders, if you want to come over him.'

Mr. Dawkins received these handsome compliments with much philosophy,
and offered to cut any gentleman in company, for the first
picture-card, at a shilling at a time.  Nobody accepting the challenge,
and his pipe being by this time smoked out, he proceeded to amuse
himself by sketching a ground-plan of Newgate on the table with the
piece of chalk which had served him in lieu of counters; whistling,
meantime, with peculiar shrillness.

'How precious dull you are, Tommy!' said the Dodger, stopping short
when there had been a long silence; and addressing Mr. Chitling.  'What
do you think he's thinking of, Fagin?'

'How should I know, my dear?' replied the Jew, looking round as he
plied the bellows.  'About his losses, maybe; or the little retirement
in the country that he's just left, eh?  Ha! ha!  Is that it, my dear?'

'Not a bit of it,' replied the Dodger, stopping the subject of
discourse as Mr. Chitling was about to reply.  'What do _you_ say,
Charley?'

'_I_ should say,' replied Master Bates, with a grin, 'that he was
uncommon sweet upon Betsy.  See how he's a-blushing!  Oh, my eye!
here's a merry-go-rounder!  Tommy Chitling's in love!  Oh, Fagin,
Fagin! what a spree!'

Thoroughly overpowered with the notion of Mr. Chitling being the victim
of the tender passion, Master Bates threw himself back in his chair
with such violence, that he lost his balance, and pitched over upon the
floor; where (the accident abating nothing of his merriment) he lay at
full length until his laugh was over, when he resumed his former
position, and began another laugh.

'Never mind him, my dear,' said the Jew, winking at Mr. Dawkins, and
giving Master Bates a reproving tap with the nozzle of the bellows.
'Betsy's a fine girl.  Stick up to her, Tom.  Stick up to her.'

'What I mean to say, Fagin,' replied Mr. Chitling, very red in the
face, 'is, that that isn't anything to anybody here.'

'No more it is,' replied the Jew; 'Charley will talk.  Don't mind him,
my dear; don't mind him.  Betsy's a fine girl.  Do as she bids you,
Tom, and you will make your fortune.'

'So I _do_ do as she bids me,' replied Mr. Chitling; 'I shouldn't have
been milled, if it hadn't been for her advice.  But it turned out a
good job for you; didn't it, Fagin!  And what's six weeks of it?  It
must come, some time or another, and why not in the winter time when
you don't want to go out a-walking so much; eh, Fagin?'

'Ah, to be sure, my dear,' replied the Jew.

'You wouldn't mind it again, Tom, would you,' asked the Dodger, winking
upon Charley and the Jew, 'if Bet was all right?'

'I mean to say that I shouldn't,' replied Tom, angrily. 'There, now.
Ah!  Who'll say as much as that, I should like to know; eh, Fagin?'

'Nobody, my dear,' replied the Jew; 'not a soul, Tom.  I don't know one
of 'em that would do it besides you; not one of 'em, my dear.'

'I might have got clear off, if I'd split upon her; mightn't I, Fagin?'
angrily pursued the poor half-witted dupe.  'A word from me would have
done it; wouldn't it, Fagin?'

'To be sure it would, my dear,' replied the Jew.

'But I didn't blab it; did I, Fagin?' demanded Tom, pouring question
upon question with great volubility.

'No, no, to be sure,' replied the Jew; 'you were too stout-hearted for
that.  A deal too stout, my dear!'

'Perhaps I was,' rejoined Tom, looking round; 'and if I was, what's to
laugh at, in that; eh, Fagin?'

The Jew, perceiving that Mr. Chitling was considerably roused, hastened
to assure him that nobody was laughing; and to prove the gravity of the
company, appealed to Master Bates, the principal offender.  But,
unfortunately, Charley, in opening his mouth to reply that he was never
more serious in his life, was unable to prevent the escape of such a
violent roar, that the abused Mr. Chitling, without any preliminary
ceremonies, rushed across the room and aimed a blow at the offender;
who, being skilful in evading pursuit, ducked to avoid it, and chose
his time so well that it lighted on the chest of the merry old
gentleman, and caused him to stagger to the wall, where he stood
panting for breath, while Mr. Chitling looked on in intense dismay.

'Hark!' cried the Dodger at this moment, 'I heard the tinkler.'
Catching up the light, he crept softly upstairs.

The bell was rung again, with some impatience, while the party were in
darkness.  After a short pause, the Dodger reappeared, and whispered
Fagin mysteriously.

'What!' cried the Jew, 'alone?'

The Dodger nodded in the affirmative, and, shading the flame of the
candle with his hand, gave Charley Bates a private intimation, in dumb
show, that he had better not be funny just then.  Having performed this
friendly office, he fixed his eyes on the Jew's face, and awaited his
directions.

The old man bit his yellow fingers, and meditated for some seconds; his
face working with agitation the while, as if he dreaded something, and
feared to know the worst.  At length he raised his head.

'Where is he?' he asked.

The Dodger pointed to the floor above, and made a gesture, as if to
leave the room.

'Yes,' said the Jew, answering the mute inquiry; 'bring him down. Hush!
Quiet, Charley!  Gently, Tom!  Scarce, scarce!'

This brief direction to Charley Bates, and his recent antagonist, was
softly and immediately obeyed.  There was no sound of their whereabout,
when the Dodger descended the stairs, bearing the light in his hand,
and followed by a man in a coarse smock-frock; who, after casting a
hurried glance round the room, pulled off a large wrapper which had
concealed the lower portion of his face, and disclosed: all haggard,
unwashed, and unshorn: the features of flash Toby Crackit.

'How are you, Faguey?' said this worthy, nodding to the Jew. 'Pop that
shawl away in my castor, Dodger, so that I may know where to find it
when I cut; that's the time of day!  You'll be a fine young cracksman
afore the old file now.'

With these words he pulled up the smock-frock; and, winding it round
his middle, drew a chair to the fire, and placed his feet upon the hob.

'See there, Faguey,' he said, pointing disconsolately to his top boots;
'not a drop of Day and Martin since you know when; not a bubble of
blacking, by Jove!   But don't look at me in that way, man.  All in
good time.  I can't talk about business till I've eat and drank; so
produce the sustainance, and let's have a quiet fill-out for the first
time these three days!'

The Jew motioned to the Dodger to place what eatables there were, upon
the table; and, seating himself opposite the housebreaker, waited his
leisure.

To judge from appearances, Toby was by no means in a hurry to open the
conversation.  At first, the Jew contented himself with patiently
watching his countenance, as if to gain from its expression some clue
to the intelligence he brought; but in vain.

He looked tired and worn, but there was the same complacent repose upon
his features that they always wore:  and through dirt, and beard, and
whisker, there still shone, unimpaired, the self-satisfied smirk of
flash Toby Crackit. Then the Jew, in an agony of impatience, watched
every morsel he put into his mouth; pacing up and down the room,
meanwhile, in irrepressible excitement.  It was all of no use.  Toby
continued to eat with the utmost outward indifference, until he could
eat no more; then, ordering the Dodger out, he closed the door, mixed a
glass of spirits and water, and composed himself for talking.

'First and foremost, Faguey,' said Toby.

'Yes, yes!' interposed the Jew, drawing up his chair.

Mr. Crackit stopped to take a draught of spirits and water, and to
declare that the gin was excellent; then placing his feet against the
low mantelpiece, so as to bring his boots to about the level of his
eye, he quietly resumed.

'First and foremost, Faguey,' said the housebreaker, 'how's Bill?'

'What!' screamed the Jew, starting from his seat.

'Why, you don't mean to say--' began Toby, turning pale.

'Mean!' cried the Jew, stamping furiously on the ground. 'Where are
they?  Sikes and the boy!  Where are they?  Where have they been?
Where are they hiding?  Why have they not been here?'

'The crack failed,' said Toby faintly.

'I know it,' replied the Jew, tearing a newspaper from his pocket and
pointing to it.  'What more?'

'They fired and hit the boy.  We cut over the fields at the back, with
him between us--straight as the crow flies--through hedge and ditch.
They gave chase.  Damme! the whole country was awake, and the dogs upon
us.'

'The boy!'

'Bill had him on his back, and scudded like the wind.  We stopped to
take him between us; his head hung down, and he was cold. They were
close upon our heels; every man for himself, and each from the gallows!
We parted company, and left the youngster lying in a ditch.  Alive or
dead, that's all I know about him.'

The Jew stopped to hear no more; but uttering a loud yell, and twining
his hands in his hair, rushed from the room, and from the house.



CHAPTER XXVI

IN WHICH A MYSTERIOUS CHARACTER APPEARS UPON THE SCENE; AND MANY
THINGS, INSEPARABLE FROM THIS HISTORY, ARE DONE AND PERFORMED

The old man had gained the street corner, before he began to recover
the effect of Toby Crackit's intelligence.  He had relaxed nothing of
his unusual speed; but was still pressing onward, in the same wild and
disordered manner, when the sudden dashing past of a carriage: and a
boisterous cry from the foot passengers, who saw his danger:  drove him
back upon the pavement.  Avoiding, as much as was possible, all the
main streets, and skulking only through the by-ways and alleys, he at
length emerged on Snow Hill.  Here he walked even faster than before;
nor did he linger until he had again turned into a court; when, as if
conscious that he was now in his proper element, he fell into his usual
shuffling pace, and seemed to breathe more freely.

Near to the spot on which Snow Hill and Holborn Hill meet, opens, upon
the right hand as you come out of the City, a narrow and dismal alley,
leading to Saffron Hill.  In its filthy shops are exposed for sale huge
bunches of second-hand silk handkerchiefs, of all sizes and patterns;
for here reside the traders who purchase them from pick-pockets.
Hundreds of these handkerchiefs hang dangling from pegs outside the
windows or flaunting from the door-posts; and the shelves, within, are
piled with them. Confined as the limits of Field Lane are, it has its
barber, its coffee-shop, its beer-shop, and its fried-fish warehouse.
It is a commercial colony of itself:  the emporium of petty larceny:
visited at early morning, and setting-in of dusk, by silent merchants,
who traffic in dark back-parlours, and who go as strangely as they
come.  Here, the clothesman, the shoe-vamper, and the rag-merchant,
display their goods, as sign-boards to the petty thief; here, stores of
old iron and bones, and heaps of mildewy fragments of woollen-stuff and
linen, rust and rot in the grimy cellars.

It was into this place that the Jew turned.  He was well known to the
sallow denizens of the lane; for such of them as were on the look-out
to buy or sell, nodded, familiarly, as he passed along. He replied to
their salutations in the same way; but bestowed no closer recognition
until he reached the further end of the alley; when he stopped, to
address a salesman of small stature, who had squeezed as much of his
person into a child's chair as the chair would hold, and was smoking a
pipe at his warehouse door.

'Why, the sight of you, Mr. Fagin, would cure the hoptalmy!' said this
respectable trader, in acknowledgment of the Jew's inquiry after his
health.

'The neighbourhood was a little too hot, Lively,' said Fagin, elevating
his eyebrows, and crossing his hands upon his shoulders.

'Well, I've heerd that complaint of it, once or twice before,' replied
the trader; 'but it soon cools down again; don't you find it so?'

Fagin nodded in the affirmative.  Pointing in the direction of Saffron
Hill, he inquired whether any one was up yonder to-night.

'At the Cripples?' inquired the man.

The Jew nodded.

'Let me see,' pursued the merchant, reflecting.

'Yes, there's some half-dozen of 'em gone in, that I knows. I don't
think your friend's there.'

'Sikes is not, I suppose?' inquired the Jew, with a disappointed
countenance.

'_Non istwentus_, as the lawyers say,' replied the little man, shaking
his head, and looking amazingly sly.  'Have you got anything in my line
to-night?'

'Nothing to-night,' said the Jew, turning away.

'Are you going up to the Cripples, Fagin?' cried the little man,
calling after him.  'Stop!  I don't mind if I have a drop there with
you!'

But as the Jew, looking back, waved his hand to intimate that he
preferred being alone; and, moreover, as the little man could not very
easily disengage himself from the chair; the sign of the Cripples was,
for a time, bereft of the advantage of Mr. Lively's presence.  By the
time he had got upon his legs, the Jew had disappeared; so Mr. Lively,
after ineffectually standing on tiptoe, in the hope of catching sight
of him, again forced himself into the little chair, and, exchanging a
shake of the head with a lady in the opposite shop, in which doubt and
mistrust were plainly mingled, resumed his pipe with a grave demeanour.

The Three Cripples, or rather the Cripples; which was the sign by which
the establishment was familiarly known to its patrons:  was the
public-house in which Mr. Sikes and his dog have already figured.
Merely making a sign to a man at the bar, Fagin walked straight
upstairs, and opening the door of a room, and softly insinuating
himself into the chamber, looked anxiously about: shading his eyes with
his hand, as if in search of some particular person.

The room was illuminated by two gas-lights; the glare of which was
prevented by the barred shutters, and closely-drawn curtains of faded
red, from being visible outside.  The ceiling was blackened, to prevent
its colour from being injured by the flaring of the lamps; and the
place was so full of dense tobacco smoke, that at first it was scarcely
possible to discern anything more.  By degrees, however, as some of it
cleared away through the open door, an assemblage of heads, as confused
as the noises that greeted the ear, might be made out; and as the eye
grew more accustomed to the scene, the spectator gradually became aware
of the presence of a numerous company, male and female, crowded round a
long table: at the upper end of which, sat a chairman with a hammer of
office in his hand; while a professional gentleman with a bluish nose,
and his face tied up for the benefit of a toothache, presided at a
jingling piano in a remote corner.

As Fagin stepped softly in, the professional gentleman, running over
the keys by way of prelude, occasioned a general cry of order for a
song; which having subsided, a young lady proceeded to entertain the
company with a ballad in four verses, between each of which the
accompanyist played the melody all through, as loud as he could.  When
this was over, the chairman gave a sentiment, after which, the
professional gentleman on the chairman's right and left volunteered a
duet, and sang it, with great applause.

It was curious to observe some faces which stood out prominently from
among the group.  There was the chairman himself, (the landlord of the
house,) a coarse, rough, heavy built fellow, who, while the songs were
proceeding, rolled his eyes hither and thither, and, seeming to give
himself up to joviality, had an eye for everything that was done, and
an ear for everything that was said--and sharp ones, too.  Near him
were the singers: receiving, with professional indifference, the
compliments of the company, and applying themselves, in turn, to a
dozen proffered glasses of spirits and water, tendered by their more
boisterous admirers; whose countenances, expressive of almost every
vice in almost every grade, irresistibly attracted the attention, by
their very repulsiveness.  Cunning, ferocity, and drunkeness in all its
stages, were there, in their strongest aspect; and women: some with the
last lingering tinge of their early freshness almost fading as you
looked:  others with every mark and stamp of their sex utterly beaten
out, and presenting but one loathsome blank of profligacy and crime;
some mere girls, others but young women, and none past the prime of
life; formed the darkest and saddest portion of this dreary picture.

Fagin, troubled by no grave emotions, looked eagerly from face to face
while these proceedings were in progress; but apparently without
meeting that of which he was in search. Succeeding, at length, in
catching the eye of the man who occupied the chair, he beckoned to him
slightly, and left the room, as quietly as he had entered it.

'What can I do for you, Mr. Fagin?' inquired the man, as he followed
him out to the landing.  'Won't you join us?  They'll be delighted,
every one of 'em.'

The Jew shook his head impatiently, and said in a whisper, 'Is _he_
here?'

'No,' replied the man.

'And no news of Barney?' inquired Fagin.

'None,' replied the landlord of the Cripples; for it was he. 'He won't
stir till it's all safe.  Depend on it, they're on the scent down
there; and that if he moved, he'd blow upon the thing at once.  He's
all right enough, Barney is, else I should have heard of him.  I'll
pound it, that Barney's managing properly. Let him alone for that.'

'Will _he_ be here to-night?' asked the Jew, laying the same emphasis
on the pronoun as before.

'Monks, do you mean?' inquired the landlord, hesitating.

'Hush!' said the Jew.  'Yes.'

'Certain,' replied the man, drawing a gold watch from his fob; 'I
expected him here before now.  If you'll wait ten minutes, he'll be--'

'No, no,' said the Jew, hastily; as though, however desirous he might
be to see the person in question, he was nevertheless relieved by his
absence.  'Tell him I came here to see him; and that he must come to me
to-night.  No, say to-morrow.  As he is not here, to-morrow will be
time enough.'

'Good!' said the man.  'Nothing more?'

'Not a word now,' said the Jew, descending the stairs.

'I say,' said the other, looking over the rails, and speaking in a
hoarse whisper; 'what a time this would be for a sell!  I've got Phil
Barker here: so drunk, that a boy might take him!'

'Ah!  But it's not Phil Barker's time,' said the Jew, looking up.

'Phil has something more to do, before we can afford to part with him;
so go back to the company, my dear, and tell them to lead merry
lives--_while they last_.  Ha! ha! ha!'

The landlord reciprocated the old man's laugh; and returned to his
guests.  The Jew was no sooner alone, than his countenance resumed its
former expression of anxiety and thought.  After a brief reflection, he
called a hack-cabriolet, and bade the man drive towards Bethnal Green.
He dismissed him within some quarter of a mile of Mr. Sikes's
residence, and performed the short remainder of the distance, on foot.

'Now,' muttered the Jew, as he knocked at the door, 'if there is any
deep play here, I shall have it out of you, my girl, cunning as you
are.'

She was in her room, the woman said.  Fagin crept softly upstairs, and
entered it without any previous ceremony.  The girl was alone; lying
with her head upon the table, and her hair straggling over it.

'She has been drinking,' thought the Jew, cooly, 'or perhaps she is
only miserable.'

The old man turned to close the door, as he made this reflection; the
noise thus occasioned, roused the girl.  She eyed his crafty face
narrowly, as she inquired to his recital of Toby Crackit's story.  When
it was concluded, she sank into her former attitude, but spoke not a
word.  She pushed the candle impatiently away; and once or twice as she
feverishly changed her position, shuffled her feet upon the ground; but
this was all.

During the silence, the Jew looked restlessly about the room, as if to
assure himself that there were no appearances of Sikes having covertly
returned.  Apparently satisfied with his inspection, he coughed twice
or thrice, and made as many efforts to open a conversation; but the
girl heeded him no more than if he had been made of stone.  At length
he made another attempt; and rubbing his hands together, said, in his
most conciliatory tone,

'And where should you think Bill was now, my dear?'

The girl moaned out some half intelligible reply, that she could not
tell; and seemed, from the smothered noise that escaped her, to be
crying.

'And the boy, too,' said the Jew, straining his eyes to catch a glimpse
of her face.  'Poor leetle child!  Left in a ditch, Nance; only think!'

'The child,' said the girl, suddenly looking up, 'is better where he
is, than among us; and if no harm comes to Bill from it, I hope he lies
dead in the ditch and that his young bones may rot there.'

'What!' cried the Jew, in amazement.

'Ay, I do,' returned the girl, meeting his gaze.  'I shall be glad to
have him away from my eyes, and to know that the worst is over.  I
can't bear to have him about me.  The sight of him turns me against
myself, and all of you.'

'Pooh!' said the Jew, scornfully.  'You're drunk.'

'Am I?' cried the girl bitterly.  'It's no fault of yours, if I am not!
You'd never have me anything else, if you had your will, except
now;--the humour doesn't suit you, doesn't it?'

'No!' rejoined the Jew, furiously.  'It does not.'

'Change it, then!' responded the girl, with a laugh.

'Change it!' exclaimed the Jew, exasperated beyond all bounds by his
companion's unexpected obstinacy, and the vexation of the night, 'I
_will_ change it!  Listen to me, you drab.  Listen to me, who with six
words, can strangle Sikes as surely as if I had his bull's throat
between my fingers now.  If he comes back, and leaves the boy behind
him; if he gets off free, and dead or alive, fails to restore him to
me; murder him yourself if you would have him escape Jack Ketch.  And
do it the moment he sets foot in this room, or mind me, it will be too
late!'

'What is all this?' cried the girl involuntarily.

'What is it?' pursued Fagin, mad with rage.  'When the boy's worth
hundreds of pounds to me, am I to lose what chance threw me in the way
of getting safely, through the whims of a drunken gang that I could
whistle away the lives of!  And me bound, too, to a born devil that
only wants the will, and has the power to, to--'

Panting for breath, the old man stammered for a word; and in that
instant checked the torrent of his wrath, and changed his whole
demeanour.  A moment before, his clenched hands had grasped the air;
his eyes had dilated; and his face grown livid with passion; but now,
he shrunk into a chair, and, cowering together, trembled with the
apprehension of having himself disclosed some hidden villainy.  After a
short silence, he ventured to look round at his companion.  He appeared
somewhat reassured, on beholding her in the same listless attitude from
which he had first roused her.

'Nancy, dear!' croaked the Jew, in his usual voice.  'Did you mind me,
dear?'

'Don't worry me now, Fagin!' replied the girl, raising her head
languidly.  'If Bill has not done it this time, he will another. He has
done many a good job for you, and will do many more when he can; and
when he can't he won't; so no more about that.'

'Regarding this boy, my dear?' said the Jew, rubbing the palms of his
hands nervously together.

'The boy must take his chance with the rest,' interrupted Nancy,
hastily; 'and I say again, I hope he is dead, and out of harm's way,
and out of yours,--that is, if Bill comes to no harm.  And if Toby got
clear off, Bill's pretty sure to be safe; for Bill's worth two of Toby
any time.'

'And about what I was saying, my dear?' observed the Jew, keeping his
glistening eye steadily upon her.

'You must say it all over again, if it's anything you want me to do,'
rejoined Nancy; 'and if it is, you had better wait till to-morrow.  You
put me up for a minute; but now I'm stupid again.'

Fagin put several other questions: all with the same drift of
ascertaining whether the girl had profited by his unguarded hints; but,
she answered them so readily, and was withal so utterly unmoved by his
searching looks, that his original impression of her being more than a
trifle in liquor, was confirmed.  Nancy, indeed, was not exempt from a
failing which was very common among the Jew's female pupils; and in
which, in their tenderer years, they were rather encouraged than
checked. Her disordered appearance, and a wholesale perfume of Geneva
which pervaded the apartment, afforded strong confirmatory evidence of
the justice of the Jew's supposition; and when, after indulging in the
temporary display of violence above described, she subsided, first into
dullness, and afterwards into a compound of feelings: under the
influence of which she shed tears one minute, and in the next gave
utterance to various exclamations of 'Never say die!' and divers
calculations as to what might be the amount of the odds so long as a
lady or gentleman was happy, Mr. Fagin, who had had considerable
experience of such matters in his time, saw, with great satisfaction,
that she was very far gone indeed.

Having eased his mind by this discovery; and having accomplished his
twofold object of imparting to the girl what he had, that night, heard,
and of ascertaining, with his own eyes, that Sikes had not returned,
Mr. Fagin again turned his face homeward: leaving his young friend
asleep, with her head upon the table.

It was within an hour of midnight.  The weather being dark, and
piercing cold, he had no great temptation to loiter.  The sharp wind
that scoured the streets, seemed to have cleared them of passengers, as
of dust and mud, for few people were abroad, and they were to all
appearance hastening fast home. It blew from the right quarter for the
Jew, however, and straight before it he went: trembling, and shivering,
as every fresh gust drove him rudely on his way.

He had reached the corner of his own street, and was already fumbling
in his pocket for the door-key, when a dark figure emerged from a
projecting entrance which lay in deep shadow, and, crossing the road,
glided up to him unperceived.

'Fagin!' whispered a voice close to his ear.

'Ah!' said the Jew, turning quickly round, 'is that--'

'Yes!' interrupted the stranger.  'I have been lingering here these two
hours.  Where the devil have you been?'

'On your business, my dear,' replied the Jew, glancing uneasily at his
companion, and slackening his pace as he spoke.  'On your business all
night.'

'Oh, of course!' said the stranger, with a sneer.  'Well; and what's
come of it?'

'Nothing good,' said the Jew.

'Nothing bad, I hope?' said the stranger, stopping short, and turning a
startled look on his companion.

The Jew shook his head, and was about to reply, when the stranger,
interrupting him, motioned to the house, before which they had by this
time arrived:  remarking, that he had better say what he had got to
say, under cover:  for his blood was chilled with standing about so
long, and the wind blew through him.

Fagin looked as if he could have willingly excused himself from taking
home a visitor at that unseasonable hour; and, indeed, muttered
something about having no fire; but his companion repeating his request
in a peremptory manner, he unlocked the door, and requested him to
close it softly, while he got a light.

'It's as dark as the grave,' said the man, groping forward a few steps.
'Make haste!'

'Shut the door,' whispered Fagin from the end of the passage. As he
spoke, it closed with a loud noise.

'That wasn't my doing,' said the other man, feeling his way. 'The wind
blew it to, or it shut of its own accord: one or the other. Look sharp
with the light, or I shall knock my brains out against something in
this confounded hole.'

Fagin stealthily descended the kitchen stairs.  After a short absence,
he returned with a lighted candle, and the intelligence that Toby
Crackit was asleep in the back room below, and that the boys were in
the front one.  Beckoning the man to follow him, he led the way
upstairs.

'We can say the few words we've got to say in here, my dear,' said the
Jew, throwing open a door on the first floor; 'and as there are holes
in the shutters, and we never show lights to our neighbours, we'll set
the candle on the stairs.  There!'

With those words, the Jew, stooping down, placed the candle on an upper
flight of stairs, exactly opposite to the room door.  This done, he led
the way into the apartment; which was destitute of all movables save a
broken arm-chair, and an old couch or sofa without covering, which
stood behind the door.  Upon this piece of furniture, the stranger sat
himself with the air of a weary man; and the Jew, drawing up the
arm-chair opposite, they sat face to face.  It was not quite dark; the
door was partially open; and the candle outside, threw a feeble
reflection on the opposite wall.

They conversed for some time in whispers.  Though nothing of the
conversation was distinguishable beyond a few disjointed words here and
there, a listener might easily have perceived that Fagin appeared to be
defending himself against some remarks of the stranger; and that the
latter was in a state of considerable irritation.  They might have been
talking, thus, for a quarter of an hour or more, when Monks--by which
name the Jew had designated the strange man several times in the course
of their colloquy--said, raising his voice a little,

'I tell you again, it was badly planned.  Why not have kept him here
among the rest, and made a sneaking, snivelling pickpocket of him at
once?'

'Only hear him!' exclaimed the Jew, shrugging his shoulders.

'Why, do you mean to say you couldn't have done it, if you had chosen?'
demanded Monks, sternly.  'Haven't you done it, with other boys, scores
of times?  If you had had patience for a twelvemonth, at most, couldn't
you have got him convicted, and sent safely out of the kingdom; perhaps
for life?'

'Whose turn would that have served, my dear?' inquired the Jew humbly.

'Mine,' replied Monks.

'But not mine,' said the Jew, submissively.  'He might have become of
use to me.  When there are two parties to a bargain, it is only
reasonable that the interests of both should be consulted; is it, my
good friend?'

'What then?' demanded Monks.

'I saw it was not easy to train him to the business,' replied the Jew;
'he was not like other boys in the same circumstances.'

'Curse him, no!' muttered the man, 'or he would have been a thief, long
ago.'

'I had no hold upon him to make him worse,' pursued the Jew, anxiously
watching the countenance of his companion.  'His hand was not in.  I
had nothing to frighten him with; which we always must have in the
beginning, or we labour in vain.  What could I do?  Send him out with
the Dodger and Charley?  We had enough of that, at first, my dear; I
trembled for us all.'

'_That_ was not my doing,' observed Monks.

'No, no, my dear!' renewed the Jew.  'And I don't quarrel with it now;
because, if it had never happened, you might never have clapped eyes on
the boy to notice him, and so led to the discovery that it was him you
were looking for.  Well!  I got him back for you by means of the girl;
and then _she_ begins to favour him.'

'Throttle the girl!' said Monks, impatiently.

'Why, we can't afford to do that just now, my dear,' replied the Jew,
smiling; 'and, besides, that sort of thing is not in our way; or, one
of these days, I might be glad to have it done.  I know what these
girls are, Monks, well.  As soon as the boy begins to harden, she'll
care no more for him, than for a block of wood.  You want him made a
thief.  If he is alive, I can make him one from this time; and,
if--if--' said the Jew, drawing nearer to the other,--'it's not likely,
mind,--but if the worst comes to the worst, and he is dead--'

'It's no fault of mine if he is!' interposed the other man, with a look
of terror, and clasping the Jew's arm with trembling hands.  'Mind
that.  Fagin!  I had no hand in it.  Anything but his death, I told you
from the first.  I won't shed blood; it's always found out, and haunts
a man besides.  If they shot him dead, I was not the cause; do you hear
me?  Fire this infernal den!  What's that?'

'What!' cried the Jew, grasping the coward round the body, with both
arms, as he sprung to his feet.  'Where?'

'Yonder! replied the man, glaring at the opposite wall.  'The shadow!
I saw the shadow of a woman, in a cloak and bonnet, pass along the
wainscot like a breath!'

The Jew released his hold, and they rushed tumultuously from the room.
The candle, wasted by the draught, was standing where it had been
placed.  It showed them only the empty staircase, and their own white
faces.  They listened intently:  a profound silence reigned throughout
the house.

'It's your fancy,' said the Jew, taking up the light and turning to his
companion.

'I'll swear I saw it!' replied Monks, trembling.  'It was bending
forward when I saw it first; and when I spoke, it darted away.'

The Jew glanced contemptuously at the pale face of his associate, and,
telling him he could follow, if he pleased, ascended the stairs.  They
looked into all the rooms; they were cold, bare, and empty.  They
descended into the passage, and thence into the cellars below.  The
green damp hung upon the low walls; the tracks of the snail and slug
glistened in the light of the candle; but all was still as death.

'What do you think now?' said the Jew, when they had regained the
passage.  'Besides ourselves, there's not a creature in the house
except Toby and the boys; and they're safe enough. See here!'

As a proof of the fact, the Jew drew forth two keys from his pocket;
and explained, that when he first went downstairs, he had locked them
in, to prevent any intrusion on the conference.

This accumulated testimony effectually staggered Mr. Monks. His
protestations had gradually become less and less vehement as they
proceeded in their search without making any discovery; and, now, he
gave vent to several very grim laughs, and confessed it could only have
been his excited imagination.  He declined any renewal of the
conversation, however, for that night:  suddenly remembering that it
was past one o'clock.  And so the amiable couple parted.



CHAPTER XXVII

ATONES FOR THE UNPOLITENESS OF A FORMER CHAPTER; WHICH DESERTED A LADY,
MOST UNCEREMONIOUSLY

As it would be, by no means, seemly in a humble author to keep so
mighty a personage as a beadle waiting, with his back to the fire, and
the skirts of his coat gathered up under his arms, until such time as
it might suit his pleasure to relieve him; and as it would still less
become his station, or his gallantry to involve in the same neglect a
lady on whom that beadle had looked with an eye of tenderness and
affection, and in whose ear he had whispered sweet words, which, coming
from such a quarter, might well thrill the bosom of maid or matron of
whatsoever degree; the historian whose pen traces these words--trusting
that he knows his place, and that he entertains a becoming reverence
for those upon earth to whom high and important authority is
delegated--hastens to pay them that respect which their position
demands, and to treat them with all that duteous ceremony which their
exalted rank, and (by consequence) great virtues, imperatively claim at
his hands.  Towards this end, indeed, he had purposed to introduce, in
this place, a dissertation touching the divine right of beadles, and
elucidative of the position, that a beadle can do no wrong:  which
could not fail to have been both pleasurable and profitable to the
right-minded reader but which he is unfortunately compelled, by want of
time and space, to postpone to some more convenient and fitting
opportunity; on the arrival of which, he will be prepared to show, that
a beadle properly constituted:  that is to say, a parochial beadle,
attached to a parochial workhouse, and attending in his official
capacity the parochial church:  is, in right and virtue of his office,
possessed of all the excellences and best qualities of humanity; and
that to none of those excellences, can mere companies' beadles, or
court-of-law beadles, or even chapel-of-ease beadles (save the last,
and they in a very lowly and inferior degree), lay the remotest
sustainable claim.

Mr. Bumble had re-counted the teaspoons, re-weighed the sugar-tongs,
made a closer inspection of the milk-pot, and ascertained to a nicety
the exact condition of the furniture, down to the very horse-hair seats
of the chairs; and had repeated each process full half a dozen times;
before he began to think that it was time for Mrs. Corney to return.
Thinking begets thinking; as there were no sounds of Mrs. Corney's
approach, it occured to Mr. Bumble that it would be an innocent and
virtuous way of spending the time, if he were further to allay his
curiousity by a cursory glance at the interior of Mrs. Corney's chest
of drawers.

Having listened at the keyhole, to assure himself that nobody was
approaching the chamber, Mr. Bumble, beginning at the bottom, proceeded
to make himself acquainted with the contents of the three long drawers:
which, being filled with various garments of good fashion and texture,
carefully preserved between two layers of old newspapers, speckled with
dried lavender: seemed to yield him exceeding satisfaction.  Arriving,
in course of time, at the right-hand corner drawer (in which was the
key), and beholding therein a small padlocked box, which, being shaken,
gave forth a pleasant sound, as of the chinking of coin, Mr. Bumble
returned with a stately walk to the fireplace; and, resuming his old
attitude, said, with a grave and determined air, 'I'll do it!' He
followed up this remarkable declaration, by shaking his head in a
waggish manner for ten minutes, as though he were remonstrating with
himself for being such a pleasant dog; and then, he took a view of his
legs in profile, with much seeming pleasure and interest.

He was still placidly engaged in this latter survey, when Mrs. Corney,
hurrying into the room, threw herself, in a breathless state, on a
chair by the fireside, and covering her eyes with one hand, placed the
other over her heart, and gasped for breath.

'Mrs. Corney,' said Mr. Bumble, stooping over the matron, 'what is
this, ma'am?  Has anything happened, ma'am?  Pray answer me: I'm
on--on--' Mr. Bumble, in his alarm, could not immediately think of the
word 'tenterhooks,' so he said 'broken bottles.'

'Oh, Mr. Bumble!' cried the lady, 'I have been so dreadfully put out!'

'Put out, ma'am!' exclaimed Mr. Bumble; 'who has dared to--?  I know!'
said Mr. Bumble, checking himself, with native majesty, 'this is them
wicious paupers!'

'It's dreadful to think of!' said the lady, shuddering.

'Then _don't_ think of it, ma'am,' rejoined Mr. Bumble.

'I can't help it,' whimpered the lady.

'Then take something, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble soothingly.  'A little of
the wine?'

'Not for the world!' replied Mrs. Corney.  'I couldn't,--oh!  The top
shelf in the right-hand corner--oh!'  Uttering these words, the good
lady pointed, distractedly, to the cupboard, and underwent a convulsion
from internal spasms.  Mr. Bumble rushed to the closet; and, snatching
a pint green-glass bottle from the shelf thus incoherently indicated,
filled a tea-cup with its contents, and held it to the lady's lips.

'I'm better now,' said Mrs. Corney, falling back, after drinking half
of it.

Mr. Bumble raised his eyes piously to the ceiling in thankfulness; and,
bringing them down again to the brim of the cup, lifted it to his nose.

'Peppermint,' exclaimed Mrs. Corney, in a faint voice, smiling gently
on the beadle as she spoke.  'Try it!  There's a little--a little
something else in it.'

Mr. Bumble tasted the medicine with a doubtful look; smacked his lips;
took another taste; and put the cup down empty.

'It's very comforting,' said Mrs. Corney.

'Very much so indeed, ma'am,' said the beadle.  As he spoke, he drew a
chair beside the matron, and tenderly inquired what had happened to
distress her.

'Nothing,' replied Mrs. Corney.  'I am a foolish, excitable, weak
creetur.'

'Not weak, ma'am,' retorted Mr. Bumble, drawing his chair a little
closer.  'Are you a weak creetur, Mrs. Corney?'

'We are all weak creeturs,' said Mrs. Corney, laying down a general
principle.

'So we are,' said the beadle.

Nothing was said on either side, for a minute or two afterwards. By the
expiration of that time, Mr. Bumble had illustrated the position by
removing his left arm from the back of Mrs. Corney's chair, where it
had previously rested, to Mrs. Corney's apron-string, round which it
gradually became entwined.

'We are all weak creeturs,' said Mr. Bumble.

Mrs. Corney sighed.

'Don't sigh, Mrs. Corney,' said Mr. Bumble.

'I can't help it,' said Mrs. Corney.  And she sighed again.

'This is a very comfortable room, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble looking
round.  'Another room, and this, ma'am, would be a complete thing.'

'It would be too much for one,' murmured the lady.

'But not for two, ma'am,' rejoined Mr. Bumble, in soft accents. 'Eh,
Mrs. Corney?'

Mrs. Corney drooped her head, when the beadle said this; the beadle
drooped his, to get a view of Mrs. Corney's face.  Mrs. Corney, with
great propriety, turned her head away, and released her hand to get at
her pocket-handkerchief; but insensibly replaced it in that of Mr.
Bumble.

'The board allows you coals, don't they, Mrs. Corney?' inquired the
beadle, affectionately pressing her hand.

'And candles,' replied Mrs. Corney, slightly returning the pressure.

'Coals, candles, and house-rent free,' said Mr. Bumble.  'Oh, Mrs.
Corney, what an Angel you are!'

The lady was not proof against this burst of feeling.  She sank into
Mr. Bumble's arms; and that gentleman in his agitation, imprinted a
passionate kiss upon her chaste nose.

'Such porochial perfection!' exclaimed Mr. Bumble, rapturously. 'You
know that Mr. Slout is worse to-night, my fascinator?'

'Yes,' replied Mrs. Corney, bashfully.

'He can't live a week, the doctor says,' pursued Mr. Bumble. 'He is the
master of this establishment; his death will cause a wacancy; that
wacancy must be filled up.  Oh, Mrs. Corney, what a prospect this
opens!  What a opportunity for a jining of hearts and housekeepings!'

Mrs. Corney sobbed.

'The little word?' said Mr. Bumble, bending over the bashful beauty.
'The one little, little, little word, my blessed Corney?'

'Ye--ye--yes!' sighed out the matron.

'One more,' pursued the beadle; 'compose your darling feelings for only
one more.  When is it to come off?'

Mrs. Corney twice essayed to speak:  and twice failed.  At length
summoning up courage, she threw her arms around Mr. Bumble's neck, and
said, it might be as soon as ever he pleased, and that he was 'a
irresistible duck.'

Matters being thus amicably and satisfactorily arranged, the contract
was solemnly ratified in another teacupful of the peppermint mixture;
which was rendered the more necessary, by the flutter and agitation of
the lady's spirits.  While it was being disposed of, she acquainted Mr.
Bumble with the old woman's decease.

'Very good,' said that gentleman, sipping his peppermint; 'I'll call at
Sowerberry's as I go home, and tell him to send to-morrow morning.  Was
it that as frightened you, love?'

'It wasn't anything particular, dear,' said the lady evasively.

'It must have been something, love,' urged Mr. Bumble. 'Won't you tell
your own B.?'

'Not now,' rejoined the lady; 'one of these days.  After we're married,
dear.'

'After we're married!' exclaimed Mr. Bumble.  'It wasn't any impudence
from any of them male paupers as--'

'No, no, love!' interposed the lady, hastily.

'If I thought it was,' continued Mr. Bumble; 'if I thought as any one
of 'em had dared to lift his wulgar eyes to that lovely countenance--'

'They wouldn't have dared to do it, love,' responded the lady.

'They had better not!' said Mr. Bumble, clenching his fist. 'Let me see
any man, porochial or extra-porochial, as would presume to do it; and I
can tell him that he wouldn't do it a second time!'

Unembellished by any violence of gesticulation, this might have seemed
no very high compliment to the lady's charms; but, as Mr. Bumble
accompanied the threat with many warlike gestures, she was much touched
with this proof of his devotion, and protested, with great admiration,
that he was indeed a dove.

The dove then turned up his coat-collar, and put on his cocked hat;
and, having exchanged a long and affectionate embrace with his future
partner, once again braved the cold wind of the night: merely pausing,
for a few minutes, in the male paupers' ward, to abuse them a little,
with the view of satisfying himself that he could fill the office of
workhouse-master with needful acerbity. Assured of his qualifications,
Mr. Bumble left the building with a light heart, and bright visions of
his future promotion:  which served to occupy his mind until he reached
the shop of the undertaker.

Now, Mr. and Mrs. Sowerberry having gone out to tea and supper: and
Noah Claypole not being at any time disposed to take upon himself a
greater amount of physical exertion than is necessary to a convenient
performance of the two functions of eating and drinking, the shop was
not closed, although it was past the usual hour of shutting-up.  Mr.
Bumble tapped with his cane on the counter several times; but,
attracting no attention, and beholding a light shining through the
glass-window of the little parlour at the back of the shop, he made
bold to peep in and see what was going forward; and when he saw what
was going forward, he was not a little surprised.

The cloth was laid for supper; the table was covered with bread and
butter, plates and glasses; a porter-pot and a wine-bottle. At the
upper end of the table, Mr. Noah Claypole lolled negligently in an
easy-chair, with his legs thrown over one of the arms: an open
clasp-knife in one hand, and a mass of buttered bread in the other.
Close beside him stood Charlotte, opening oysters from a barrel: which
Mr. Claypole condescended to swallow, with remarkable avidity.  A more
than ordinary redness in the region of the young gentleman's nose, and
a kind of fixed wink in his right eye, denoted that he was in a slight
degree intoxicated; these symptoms were confirmed by the intense relish
with which he took his oysters, for which nothing but a strong
appreciation of their cooling properties, in cases of internal fever,
could have sufficiently accounted.

'Here's a delicious fat one, Noah, dear!' said Charlotte; 'try him, do;
only this one.'

'What a delicious thing is a oyster!' remarked Mr. Claypole, after he
had swallowed it.  'What a pity it is, a number of 'em should ever make
you feel uncomfortable; isn't it, Charlotte?'

'It's quite a cruelty,' said Charlotte.

'So it is,' acquiesced Mr. Claypole. 'An't yer fond of oysters?'

'Not overmuch,' replied Charlotte.  'I like to see you eat 'em, Noah
dear, better than eating 'em myself.'

'Lor!' said Noah, reflectively; 'how queer!'

'Have another,' said Charlotte.  'Here's one with such a beautiful,
delicate beard!'

'I can't manage any more,' said Noah.  'I'm very sorry.  Come here,
Charlotte, and I'll kiss yer.'

'What!' said Mr. Bumble, bursting into the room.  'Say that again, sir.'

Charlotte uttered a scream, and hid her face in her apron.  Mr.
Claypole, without making any further change in his position than
suffering his legs to reach the ground, gazed at the beadle in drunken
terror.

'Say it again, you wile, owdacious fellow!' said Mr. Bumble. 'How dare
you mention such a thing, sir?  And how dare you encourage him, you
insolent minx?  Kiss her!' exclaimed Mr. Bumble, in strong indignation.
'Faugh!'

'I didn't mean to do it!' said Noah, blubbering.  'She's always
a-kissing of me, whether I like it, or not.'

'Oh, Noah,' cried Charlotte, reproachfully.

'Yer are; yer know yer are!' retorted Noah.  'She's always a-doin' of
it, Mr. Bumble, sir; she chucks me under the chin, please, sir; and
makes all manner of love!'

'Silence!' cried Mr. Bumble, sternly.  'Take yourself downstairs,
ma'am.  Noah, you shut up the shop; say another word till your master
comes home, at your peril; and, when he does come home, tell him that
Mr. Bumble said he was to send a old woman's shell after breakfast
to-morrow morning.  Do you hear sir?  Kissing!' cried Mr. Bumble,
holding up his hands.  'The sin and wickedness of the lower orders in
this porochial district is frightful!  If Parliament don't take their
abominable courses under consideration, this country's ruined, and the
character of the peasantry gone for ever!'  With these words, the
beadle strode, with a lofty and gloomy air, from the undertaker's
premises.

And now that we have accompanied him so far on his road home, and have
made all necessary preparations for the old woman's funeral, let us set
on foot a few inquires after young Oliver Twist, and ascertain whether
he be still lying in the ditch where Toby Crackit left him.



CHAPTER XXVIII

LOOKS AFTER OLIVER, AND PROCEEDS WITH HIS ADVENTURES

'Wolves tear your throats!' muttered Sikes, grinding his teeth. 'I wish
I was among some of you; you'd howl the hoarser for it.'

As Sikes growled forth this imprecation, with the most desperate
ferocity that his desperate nature was capable of, he rested the body
of the wounded boy across his bended knee; and turned his head, for an
instant, to look back at his pursuers.

There was little to be made out, in the mist and darkness; but the loud
shouting of men vibrated through the air, and the barking of the
neighbouring dogs, roused by the sound of the alarm bell, resounded in
every direction.

'Stop, you white-livered hound!' cried the robber, shouting after Toby
Crackit, who, making the best use of his long legs, was already ahead.
'Stop!'

The repetition of the word, brought Toby to a dead stand-still. For he
was not quite satisfied that he was beyond the range of pistol-shot;
and Sikes was in no mood to be played with.

'Bear a hand with the boy,' cried Sikes, beckoning furiously to his
confederate.  'Come back!'

Toby made a show of returning; but ventured, in a low voice, broken for
want of breath, to intimate considerable reluctance as he came slowly
along.

'Quicker!' cried Sikes, laying the boy in a dry ditch at his feet, and
drawing a pistol from his pocket.  'Don't play booty with me.'

At this moment the noise grew louder.  Sikes, again looking round,
could discern that the men who had given chase were already climbing
the gate of the field in which he stood; and that a couple of dogs were
some paces in advance of them.

'It's all up, Bill!' cried Toby; 'drop the kid, and show 'em your
heels.'  With this parting advice, Mr. Crackit, preferring the chance
of being shot by his friend, to the certainty of being taken by his
enemies, fairly turned tail, and darted off at full speed.  Sikes
clenched his teeth; took one look around; threw over the prostrate form
of Oliver, the cape in which he had been hurriedly muffled; ran along
the front of the hedge, as if to distract the attention of those
behind, from the spot where the boy lay; paused, for a second, before
another hedge which met it at right angles; and whirling his pistol
high into the air, cleared it at a bound, and was gone.

'Ho, ho, there!' cried a tremulous voice in the rear. 'Pincher!
Neptune!  Come here, come here!'

The dogs, who, in common with their masters, seemed to have no
particular relish for the sport in which they were engaged, readily
answered to the command.  Three men, who had by this time advanced some
distance into the field, stopped to take counsel together.

'My advice, or, leastways, I should say, my _orders_, is,' said the
fattest man of the party, 'that we 'mediately go home again.'

'I am agreeable to anything which is agreeable to Mr. Giles,' said a
shorter man; who was by no means of a slim figure, and who was very
pale in the face, and very polite: as frightened men frequently are.

'I shouldn't wish to appear ill-mannered, gentlemen,' said the third,
who had called the dogs back, 'Mr. Giles ought to know.'

'Certainly,' replied the shorter man; 'and whatever Mr. Giles says, it
isn't our place to contradict him.  No, no, I know my sitiwation!
Thank my stars, I know my sitiwation.'  To tell the truth, the little
man _did_ seem to know his situation, and to know perfectly well that
it was by no means a desirable one; for his teeth chattered in his head
as he spoke.

'You are afraid, Brittles,' said Mr. Giles.

'I an't,' said Brittles.

'You are,' said Giles.

'You're a falsehood, Mr. Giles,' said Brittles.

'You're a lie, Brittles,' said Mr. Giles.

Now, these four retorts arose from Mr. Giles's taunt; and Mr. Giles's
taunt had arisen from his indignation at having the responsibility of
going home again, imposed upon himself under cover of a compliment.
The third man brought the dispute to a close, most philosophically.

'I'll tell you what it is, gentlemen,' said he, 'we're all afraid.'

'Speak for yourself, sir,' said Mr. Giles, who was the palest of the
party.

'So I do,' replied the man.  'It's natural and proper to be afraid,
under such circumstances.  I am.'

'So am I,' said Brittles; 'only there's no call to tell a man he is, so
bounceably.'

These frank admissions softened Mr. Giles, who at once owned that _he_
was afraid; upon which, they all three faced about, and ran back again
with the completest unanimity, until Mr. Giles (who had the shortest
wind of the party, as was encumbered with a pitchfork) most handsomely
insisted on stopping, to make an apology for his hastiness of speech.

'But it's wonderful,' said Mr. Giles, when he had explained, 'what a
man will do, when his blood is up.  I should have committed murder--I
know I should--if we'd caught one of them rascals.'

As the other two were impressed with a similar presentiment; and as
their blood, like his, had all gone down again; some speculation ensued
upon the cause of this sudden change in their temperament.

'I know what it was,' said Mr. Giles; 'it was the gate.'

'I shouldn't wonder if it was,' exclaimed Brittles, catching at the
idea.

'You may depend upon it,' said Giles, 'that that gate stopped the flow
of the excitement.  I felt all mine suddenly going away, as I was
climbing over it.'

By a remarkable coincidence, the other two had been visited with the
same unpleasant sensation at that precise moment.  It was quite
obvious, therefore, that it was the gate; especially as there was no
doubt regarding the time at which the change had taken place, because
all three remembered that they had come in sight of the robbers at the
instant of its occurance.

This dialogue was held between the two men who had surprised the
burglars, and a travelling tinker who had been sleeping in an outhouse,
and who had been roused, together with his two mongrel curs, to join in
the pursuit.  Mr. Giles acted in the double capacity of butler and
steward to the old lady of the mansion; Brittles was a lad of all-work:
who, having entered her service a mere child, was treated as a
promising young boy still, though he was something past thirty.

Encouraging each other with such converse as this; but, keeping very
close together, notwithstanding, and looking apprehensively round,
whenever a fresh gust rattled through the boughs; the three men hurried
back to a tree, behind which they had left their lantern, lest its
light should inform the thieves in what direction to fire.  Catching up
the light, they made the best of their way home, at a good round trot;
and long after their dusky forms had ceased to be discernible, the
light might have been seen twinkling and dancing in the distance, like
some exhalation of the damp and gloomy atmosphere through which it was
swiftly borne.

The air grew colder, as day came slowly on; and the mist rolled along
the ground like a dense cloud of smoke.  The grass was wet; the
pathways, and low places, were all mire and water; the damp breath of
an unwholesome wind went languidly by, with a hollow moaning.  Still,
Oliver lay motionless and insensible on the spot where Sikes had left
him.

Morning drew on apace.  The air become more sharp and piercing, as its
first dull hue--the death of night, rather than the birth of
day--glimmered faintly in the sky.  The objects which had looked dim
and terrible in the darkness, grew more and more defined, and gradually
resolved into their familiar shapes.  The rain came down, thick and
fast, and pattered noisily among the leafless bushes.  But, Oliver felt
it not, as it beat against him; for he still lay stretched, helpless
and unconscious, on his bed of clay.

At length, a low cry of pain broke the stillness that prevailed; and
uttering it, the boy awoke.  His left arm, rudely bandaged in a shawl,
hung heavy and useless at his side; the bandage was saturated with
blood.  He was so weak, that he could scarcely raise himself into a
sitting posture; when he had done so, he looked feebly round for help,
and groaned with pain.  Trembling in every joint, from cold and
exhaustion, he made an effort to stand upright; but, shuddering from
head to foot, fell prostrate on the ground.

After a short return of the stupor in which he had been so long
plunged, Oliver:  urged by a creeping sickness at his heart, which
seemed to warn him that if he lay there, he must surely die:  got upon
his feet, and essayed to walk. His head was dizzy, and he staggered to
and fro like a drunken man.  But he kept up, nevertheless, and, with
his head drooping languidly on his breast, went stumbling onward, he
knew not whither.

And now, hosts of bewildering and confused ideas came crowding on his
mind.  He seemed to be still walking between Sikes and Crackit, who
were angrily disputing--for the very words they said, sounded in his
ears; and when he caught his own attention, as it were, by making some
violent effort to save himself from falling, he found that he was
talking to them. Then, he was alone with Sikes, plodding on as on the
previous day; and as shadowy people passed them, he felt the robber's
grasp upon his wrist. Suddenly, he started back at the report of
firearms; there rose into the air, loud cries and shouts; lights
gleamed before his eyes; all was noise and tumult, as some unseen hand
bore him hurriedly away.  Through all these rapid visions, there ran an
undefined, uneasy consciousness of pain, which wearied and tormented
him incessantly.

Thus he staggered on, creeping, almost mechanically, between the bars
of gates, or through hedge-gaps as they came in his way, until he
reached a road.  Here the rain began to fall so heavily, that it roused
him.

He looked about, and saw that at no great distance there was a house,
which perhaps he could reach.  Pitying his condition, they might have
compassion on him; and if they did not, it would be better, he thought,
to die near human beings, than in the lonely open fields.  He summoned
up all his strength for one last trial, and bent his faltering steps
towards it.

As he drew nearer to this house, a feeling come over him that he had
seen it before.  He remembered nothing of its details; but the shape
and aspect of the building seemed familiar to him.

That garden wall!  On the grass inside, he had fallen on his knees last
night, and prayed the two men's mercy.  It was the very house they had
attempted to rob.

Oliver felt such fear come over him when he recognised the place, that,
for the instant, he forgot the agony of his wound, and thought only of
flight.  Flight!  He could scarcely stand:  and if he were in full
possession of all the best powers of his slight and youthful frame,
whither could he fly?  He pushed against the garden-gate; it was
unlocked, and swung open on its hinges.  He tottered across the lawn;
climbed the steps; knocked faintly at the door; and, his whole strength
failing him, sunk down against one of the pillars of the little portico.

It happened that about this time, Mr. Giles, Brittles, and the tinker,
were recruiting themselves, after the fatigues and terrors of the
night, with tea and sundries, in the kitchen.  Not that it was Mr.
Giles's habit to admit to too great familiarity the humbler servants:
towards whom it was rather his wont to deport himself with a lofty
affability, which, while it gratified, could not fail to remind them of
his superior position in society.  But, death, fires, and burglary,
make all men equals; so Mr. Giles sat with his legs stretched out
before the kitchen fender, leaning his left arm on the table, while,
with his right, he illustrated a circumstantial and minute account of
the robbery, to which his bearers (but especially the cook and
housemaid, who were of the party) listened with breathless interest.

'It was about half-past two,' said Mr. Giles, 'or I wouldn't swear that
it mightn't have been a little nearer three, when I woke up, and,
turning round in my bed, as it might be so, (here Mr. Giles turned
round in his chair, and pulled the corner of the table-cloth over him
to imitate bed-clothes,) I fancied I heerd a noise.'

At this point of the narrative the cook turned pale, and asked the
housemaid to shut the door: who asked Brittles, who asked the tinker,
who pretended not to hear.

'--Heerd a noise,' continued Mr. Giles.  'I says, at first, "This is
illusion"; and was composing myself off to sleep, when I heerd the
noise again, distinct.'

'What sort of a noise?' asked the cook.

'A kind of a busting noise,' replied Mr. Giles, looking round him.

'More like the noise of powdering a iron bar on a nutmeg-grater,'
suggested Brittles.

'It was, when _you_ heerd it, sir,' rejoined Mr. Giles; 'but, at this
time, it had a busting sound.  I turned down the clothes'; continued
Giles, rolling back the table-cloth, 'sat up in bed; and listened.'

The cook and housemaid simultaneously ejaculated 'Lor!' and drew their
chairs closer together.

'I heerd it now, quite apparent,' resumed Mr. Giles. '"Somebody," I
says, "is forcing of a door, or window; what's to be done? I'll call up
that poor lad, Brittles, and save him from being murdered in his bed;
or his throat," I says, "may be cut from his right ear to his left,
without his ever knowing it."'

Here, all eyes were turned upon Brittles, who fixed his upon the
speaker, and stared at him, with his mouth wide open, and his face
expressive of the most unmitigated horror.

'I tossed off the clothes,' said Giles, throwing away the table-cloth,
and looking very hard at the cook and housemaid, 'got softly out of
bed; drew on a pair of--'

'Ladies present, Mr. Giles,' murmured the tinker.

'--Of _shoes_, sir,' said Giles, turning upon him, and laying great
emphasis on the word; 'seized the loaded pistol that always goes
upstairs with the plate-basket; and walked on tiptoes to his room.
"Brittles," I says, when I had woke him, "don't be frightened!"'

'So you did,' observed Brittles, in a low voice.

'"We're dead men, I think, Brittles," I says,' continued Giles; '"but
don't be frightened."'

'_Was_ he frightened?' asked the cook.

'Not a bit of it,' replied Mr. Giles.  'He was as firm--ah! pretty near
as firm as I was.'

'I should have died at once, I'm sure, if it had been me,' observed the
housemaid.

'You're a woman,' retorted Brittles, plucking up a little.

'Brittles is right,' said Mr. Giles, nodding his head, approvingly;
'from a woman, nothing else was to be expected. We, being men, took a
dark lantern that was standing on Brittle's hob, and groped our way
downstairs in the pitch dark,--as it might be so.'

Mr. Giles had risen from his seat, and taken two steps with his eyes
shut, to accompany his description with appropriate action, when he
started violently, in common with the rest of the company, and hurried
back to his chair.  The cook and housemaid screamed.

'It was a knock,' said Mr. Giles, assuming perfect serenity. 'Open the
door, somebody.'

Nobody moved.

'It seems a strange sort of a thing, a knock coming at such a time in
the morning,' said Mr. Giles, surveying the pale faces which surrounded
him, and looking very blank himself; 'but the door must be opened.  Do
you hear, somebody?'

Mr. Giles, as he spoke, looked at Brittles; but that young man, being
naturally modest, probably considered himself nobody, and so held that
the inquiry could not have any application to him; at all events, he
tendered no reply. Mr. Giles directed an appealing glance at the
tinker; but he had suddenly fallen asleep.  The women were out of the
question.

'If Brittles would rather open the door, in the presence of witnesses,'
said Mr. Giles, after a short silence, 'I am ready to make one.'

'So am I,' said the tinker, waking up, as suddenly as he had fallen
asleep.

Brittles capitulated on these terms; and the party being somewhat
re-assured by the discovery (made on throwing open the shutters) that
it was now broad day, took their way upstairs; with the dogs in front.
The two women, who were afraid to stay below, brought up the rear.  By
the advice of Mr. Giles, they all talked very loud, to warn any
evil-disposed person outside, that they were strong in numbers; and by
a master-stoke of policy, originating in the brain of the same
ingenious gentleman, the dogs' tails were well pinched, in the hall, to
make them bark savagely.

These precautions having been taken, Mr. Giles held on fast by the
tinker's arm (to prevent his running away, as he pleasantly said), and
gave the word of command to open the door.  Brittles obeyed; the group,
peeping timorously over each other's shoulders, beheld no more
formidable object than poor little Oliver Twist, speechless and
exhausted, who raised his heavy eyes, and mutely solicited their
compassion.

'A boy!' exclaimed Mr. Giles, valiantly, pushing the tinker into the
background.  'What's the matter with the--eh?--Why--Brittles--look
here--don't you know?'

Brittles, who had got behind the door to open it, no sooner saw Oliver,
than he uttered a loud cry.  Mr. Giles, seizing the boy by one leg and
one arm (fortunately not the broken limb) lugged him straight into the
hall, and deposited him at full length on the floor thereof.

'Here he is!' bawled Giles, calling in a state of great excitement, up
the staircase; 'here's one of the thieves, ma'am! Here's a thief, miss!
Wounded, miss!  I shot him, miss; and Brittles held the light.'

'--In a lantern, miss,' cried Brittles, applying one hand to the side
of his mouth, so that his voice might travel the better.

The two women-servants ran upstairs to carry the intelligence that Mr.
Giles had captured a robber; and the tinker busied himself in
endeavouring to restore Oliver, lest he should die before he could be
hanged.  In the midst of all this noise and commotion, there was heard
a sweet female voice, which quelled it in an instant.

'Giles!' whispered the voice from the stair-head.

'I'm here, miss,' replied Mr. Giles.  'Don't be frightened, miss; I
ain't much injured.  He didn't make a very desperate resistance, miss!
I was soon too many for him.'

'Hush!' replied the young lady; 'you frighten my aunt as much as the
thieves did.  Is the poor creature much hurt?'

'Wounded desperate, miss,' replied Giles, with indescribable
complacency.

'He looks as if he was a-going, miss,' bawled Brittles, in the same
manner as before.  'Wouldn't you like to come and look at him, miss, in
case he should?'

'Hush, pray; there's a good man!' rejoined the lady.  'Wait quietly
only one instant, while I speak to aunt.'

With a footstep as soft and gentle as the voice, the speaker tripped
away.  She soon returned, with the direction that the wounded person
was to be carried, carefully, upstairs to Mr. Giles's room; and that
Brittles was to saddle the pony and betake himself instantly to
Chertsey:  from which place, he was to despatch, with all speed, a
constable and doctor.

'But won't you take one look at him, first, miss?' asked Mr. Giles,
with as much pride as if Oliver were some bird of rare plumage, that he
had skilfully brought down.  'Not one little peep, miss?'

'Not now, for the world,' replied the young lady.  'Poor fellow! Oh!
treat him kindly, Giles for my sake!'

The old servant looked up at the speaker, as she turned away, with a
glance as proud and admiring as if she had been his own child.  Then,
bending over Oliver, he helped to carry him upstairs, with the care and
solicitude of a woman.



CHAPTER XXIX

HAS AN INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNT OF THE INMATES OF THE HOUSE, TO WHICH
OLIVER RESORTED

In a handsome room:  though its furniture had rather the air of
old-fashioned comfort, than of modern elegance:  there sat two ladies
at a well-spread breakfast-table.  Mr. Giles, dressed with scrupulous
care in a full suit of black, was in attendance upon them.  He had
taken his station some half-way between the side-board and the
breakfast-table; and, with his body drawn up to its full height, his
head thrown back, and inclined the merest trifle on one side, his left
leg advanced, and his right hand thrust into his waist-coat, while his
left hung down by his side, grasping a waiter, looked like one who
laboured under a very agreeable sense of his own merits and importance.

Of the two ladies, one was well advanced in years; but the high-backed
oaken chair in which she sat, was not more upright than she.  Dressed
with the utmost nicety and precision, in a quaint mixture of by-gone
costume, with some slight concessions to the prevailing taste, which
rather served to point the old style pleasantly than to impair its
effect, she sat, in a stately manner, with her hands folded on the
table before her.  Her eyes (and age had dimmed but little of their
brightness) were attentively upon her young companion.

The younger lady was in the lovely bloom and spring-time of womanhood;
at that age, when, if ever angels be for God's good purposes enthroned
in mortal forms, they may be, without impiety, supposed to abide in
such as hers.

She was not past seventeen.  Cast in so slight and exquisite a mould;
so mild and gentle; so pure and beautiful; that earth seemed not her
element, nor its rough creatures her fit companions.  The very
intelligence that shone in her deep blue eye, and was stamped upon her
noble head, seemed scarcely of her age, or of the world; and yet the
changing expression of sweetness and good humour, the thousand lights
that played about the face, and left no shadow there; above all, the
smile, the cheerful, happy smile, were made for Home, and fireside
peace and happiness.

She was busily engaged in the little offices of the table. Chancing to
raise her eyes as the elder lady was regarding her, she playfully put
back her hair, which was simply braided on her forehead; and threw into
her beaming look, such an expression of affection and artless
loveliness, that blessed spirits might have smiled to look upon her.

'And Brittles has been gone upwards of an hour, has he?' asked the old
lady, after a pause.

'An hour and twelve minutes, ma'am,' replied Mr. Giles, referring to a
silver watch, which he drew forth by a black ribbon.

'He is always slow,' remarked the old lady.

'Brittles always was a slow boy, ma'am,' replied the attendant. And
seeing, by the bye, that Brittles had been a slow boy for upwards of
thirty years, there appeared no great probability of his ever being a
fast one.

'He gets worse instead of better, I think,' said the elder lady.

'It is very inexcusable in him if he stops to play with any other
boys,' said the young lady, smiling.

Mr. Giles was apparently considering the propriety of indulging in a
respectful smile himself, when a gig drove up to the garden-gate: out
of which there jumped a fat gentleman, who ran straight up to the door:
and who, getting quickly into the house by some mysterious process,
burst into the room, and nearly overturned Mr. Giles and the
breakfast-table together.

'I never heard of such a thing!' exclaimed the fat gentleman. 'My dear
Mrs. Maylie--bless my soul--in the silence of the night, too--I _never_
heard of such a thing!'

With these expressions of condolence, the fat gentleman shook hands
with both ladies, and drawing up a chair, inquired how they found
themselves.

'You ought to be dead; positively dead with the fright,' said the fat
gentleman.  'Why didn't you send?  Bless me, my man should have come in
a minute; and so would I; and my assistant would have been delighted;
or anybody, I'm sure, under such circumstances.  Dear, dear!  So
unexpected!  In the silence of the night, too!'

The doctor seemed expecially troubled by the fact of the robbery having
been unexpected, and attempted in the night-time; as if it were the
established custom of gentlemen in the housebreaking way to transact
business at noon, and to make an appointment, by post, a day or two
previous.

'And you, Miss Rose,' said the doctor, turning to the young lady, 'I--'

'Oh! very much so, indeed,' said Rose, interrupting him; 'but there is
a poor creature upstairs, whom aunt wishes you to see.'

'Ah! to be sure,' replied the doctor, 'so there is.  That was your
handiwork, Giles, I understand.'

Mr. Giles, who had been feverishly putting the tea-cups to rights,
blushed very red, and said that he had had that honour.

'Honour, eh?' said the doctor; 'well, I don't know; perhaps it's as
honourable to hit a thief in a back kitchen, as to hit your man at
twelve paces.  Fancy that he fired in the air, and you've fought a
duel, Giles.'

Mr. Giles, who thought this light treatment of the matter an unjust
attempt at diminishing his glory, answered respectfully, that it was
not for the like of him to judge about that; but he rather thought it
was no joke to the opposite party.

'Gad, that's true!' said the doctor.  'Where is he?  Show me the way.
I'll look in again, as I come down, Mrs. Maylie.  That's the little
window that he got in at, eh?  Well, I couldn't have believed it!'

Talking all the way, he followed Mr. Giles upstairs; and while he is
going upstairs, the reader may be informed, that Mr. Losberne, a
surgeon in the neighbourhood, known through a circuit of ten miles
round as 'the doctor,' had grown fat, more from good-humour than from
good living:  and was as kind and hearty, and withal as eccentric an
old bachelor, as will be found in five times that space, by any
explorer alive.

The doctor was absent, much longer than either he or the ladies had
anticipated.  A large flat box was fetched out of the gig; and a
bedroom bell was rung very often; and the servants ran up and down
stairs perpetually; from which tokens it was justly concluded that
something important was going on above.  At length he returned; and in
reply to an anxious inquiry after his patient; looked very mysterious,
and closed the door, carefully.

'This is a very extraordinary thing, Mrs. Maylie,' said the doctor,
standing with his back to the door, as if to keep it shut.

'He is not in danger, I hope?' said the old lady.

'Why, that would _not_ be an extraordinary thing, under the
circumstances,' replied the doctor; 'though I don't think he is. Have
you seen the thief?'

'No,' rejoined the old lady.

'Nor heard anything about him?'

'No.'

'I beg your pardon, ma'am, interposed Mr. Giles; 'but I was going to
tell you about him when Doctor Losberne came in.'

The fact was, that Mr. Giles had not, at first, been able to bring his
mind to the avowal, that he had only shot a boy.  Such commendations
had been bestowed upon his bravery, that he could not, for the life of
him, help postponing the explanation for a few delicious minutes;
during which he had flourished, in the very zenith of a brief
reputation for undaunted courage.

'Rose wished to see the man,' said Mrs. Maylie, 'but I wouldn't hear of
it.'

'Humph!' rejoined the doctor.  'There is nothing very alarming in his
appearance.  Have you any objection to see him in my presence?'

'If it be necessary,' replied the old lady, 'certainly not.'

'Then I think it is necessary,' said the doctor; 'at all events, I am
quite sure that you would deeply regret not having done so, if you
postponed it.  He is perfectly quiet and comfortable now. Allow
me--Miss Rose, will you permit me?  Not the slightest fear, I pledge
you my honour!'



CHAPTER XXX

RELATES WHAT OLIVER'S NEW VISITORS THOUGHT OF HIM

With many loquacious assurances that they would be agreeably surprised
in the aspect of the criminal, the doctor drew the young lady's arm
through one of his; and offering his disengaged hand to Mrs. Maylie,
led them, with much ceremony and stateliness, upstairs.

'Now,' said the doctor, in a whisper, as he softly turned the handle of
a bedroom-door, 'let us hear what you think of him.  He has not been
shaved very recently, but he don't look at all ferocious
notwithstanding.  Stop, though!  Let me first see that he is in
visiting order.'

Stepping before them, he looked into the room.  Motioning them to
advance, he closed the door when they had entered; and gently drew back
the curtains of the bed.  Upon it, in lieu of the dogged, black-visaged
ruffian they had expected to behold, there lay a mere child:  worn with
pain and exhaustion, and sunk into a deep sleep.  His wounded arm,
bound and splintered up, was crossed upon his breast; his head reclined
upon the other arm, which was half hidden by his long hair, as it
streamed over the pillow.

The honest gentleman held the curtain in his hand, and looked on, for a
minute or so, in silence.  Whilst he was watching the patient thus, the
younger lady glided softly past, and seating herself in a chair by the
bedside, gathered Oliver's hair from his face.  As she stooped over
him, her tears fell upon his forehead.

The boy stirred, and smiled in his sleep, as though these marks of pity
and compassion had awakened some pleasant dream of a love and affection
he had never known.  Thus, a strain of gentle music, or the rippling of
water in a silent place, or the odour of a flower, or the mention of a
familiar word, will sometimes call up sudden dim remembrances of scenes
that never were, in this life; which vanish like a breath; which some
brief memory of a happier existence, long gone by, would seem to have
awakened; which no voluntary exertion of the mind can ever recall.

'What can this mean?' exclaimed the elder lady.  'This poor child can
never have been the pupil of robbers!'

'Vice,' said the surgeon, replacing the curtain, 'takes up her abode in
many temples; and who can say that a fair outside shell not enshrine
her?'

'But at so early an age!' urged Rose.

'My dear young lady,' rejoined the surgeon, mournfully shaking his
head; 'crime, like death, is not confined to the old and withered
alone.  The youngest and fairest are too often its chosen victims.'

'But, can you--oh! can you really believe that this delicate boy has
been the voluntary associate of the worst outcasts of society?' said
Rose.

The surgeon shook his head, in a manner which intimated that he feared
it was very possible; and observing that they might disturb the
patient, led the way into an adjoining apartment.

'But even if he has been wicked,' pursued Rose, 'think how young he is;
think that he may never have known a mother's love, or the comfort of a
home; that ill-usage and blows, or the want of bread, may have driven
him to herd with men who have forced him to guilt.  Aunt, dear aunt,
for mercy's sake, think of this, before you let them drag this sick
child to a prison, which in any case must be the grave of all his
chances of amendment.  Oh! as you love me, and know that I have never
felt the want of parents in your goodness and affection, but that I
might have done so, and might have been equally helpless and
unprotected with this poor child, have pity upon him before it is too
late!'

'My dear love,' said the elder lady, as she folded the weeping girl to
her bosom, 'do you think I would harm a hair of his head?'

'Oh, no!' replied Rose, eagerly.

'No, surely,' said the old lady; 'my days are drawing to their close:
and may mercy be shown to me as I show it to others! What can I do to
save him, sir?'

'Let me think, ma'am,' said the doctor; 'let me think.'

Mr. Losberne thrust his hands into his pockets, and took several turns
up and down the room; often stopping, and balancing himself on his
toes, and frowning frightfully.  After various exclamations of 'I've
got it now' and 'no, I haven't,' and as many renewals of the walking
and frowning, he at length made a dead halt, and spoke as follows:

'I think if you give me a full and unlimited commission to bully Giles,
and that little boy, Brittles, I can manage it.  Giles is a faithful
fellow and an old servant, I know; but you can make it up to him in a
thousand ways, and reward him for being such a good shot besides.  You
don't object to that?'

'Unless there is some other way of preserving the child,' replied Mrs.
Maylie.

'There is no other,' said the doctor.  'No other, take my word for it.'

'Then my aunt invests you with full power,' said Rose, smiling through
her tears; 'but pray don't be harder upon the poor fellows than is
indispensably necessary.'

'You seem to think,' retorted the doctor, 'that everybody is disposed
to be hard-hearted to-day, except yourself, Miss Rose. I only hope, for
the sake of the rising male sex generally, that you may be found in as
vulnerable and soft-hearted a mood by the first eligible young fellow
who appeals to your compassion; and I wish I were a young fellow, that
I might avail myself, on the spot, of such a favourable opportunity for
doing so, as the present.'

'You are as great a boy as poor Brittles himself,' returned Rose,
blushing.

'Well,' said the doctor, laughing heartily, 'that is no very difficult
matter.  But to return to this boy.  The great point of our agreement
is yet to come.  He will wake in an hour or so, I dare say; and
although I have told that thick-headed constable-fellow downstairs that
he musn't be moved or spoken to, on peril of his life, I think we may
converse with him without danger.  Now I make this stipulation--that I
shall examine him in your presence, and that, if, from what he says, we
judge, and I can show to the satisfaction of your cool reason, that he
is a real and thorough bad one (which is more than possible), he shall
be left to his fate, without any farther interference on my part, at
all events.'

'Oh no, aunt!' entreated Rose.

'Oh yes, aunt!' said the doctor.  'Is is a bargain?'

'He cannot be hardened in vice,' said Rose; 'It is impossible.'

'Very good,' retorted the doctor; 'then so much the more reason for
acceding to my proposition.'

Finally the treaty was entered into; and the parties thereunto sat down
to wait, with some impatience, until Oliver should awake.

The patience of the two ladies was destined to undergo a longer trial
than Mr. Losberne had led them to expect; for hour after hour passed
on, and still Oliver slumbered heavily.  It was evening, indeed, before
the kind-hearted doctor brought them the intelligence, that he was at
length sufficiently restored to be spoken to.  The boy was very ill, he
said, and weak from the loss of blood; but his mind was so troubled
with anxiety to disclose something, that he deemed it better to give
him the opportunity, than to insist upon his remaining quiet until next
morning: which he should otherwise have done.

The conference was a long one.  Oliver told them all his simple
history, and was often compelled to stop, by pain and want of strength.
It was a solemn thing, to hear, in the darkened room, the feeble voice
of the sick child recounting a weary catalogue of evils and calamities
which hard men had brought upon him.  Oh! if when we oppress and grind
our fellow-creatures, we bestowed but one thought on the dark evidences
of human error, which, like dense and heavy clouds, are rising, slowly
it is true, but not less surely, to Heaven, to pour their
after-vengeance on our heads; if we heard but one instant, in
imagination, the deep testimony of dead men's voices, which no power
can stifle, and no pride shut out; where would be the injury and
injustice, the suffering, misery, cruelty, and wrong, that each day's
life brings with it!

Oliver's pillow was smoothed by gentle hands that night; and loveliness
and virtue watched him as he slept.  He felt calm and happy, and could
have died without a murmur.

The momentous interview was no sooner concluded, and Oliver composed to
rest again, than the doctor, after wiping his eyes, and condemning them
for being weak all at once, betook himself downstairs to open upon Mr.
Giles.  And finding nobody about the parlours, it occurred to him, that
he could perhaps originate the proceedings with better effect in the
kitchen; so into the kitchen he went.

There were assembled, in that lower house of the domestic parliament,
the women-servants, Mr. Brittles, Mr. Giles, the tinker (who had
received a special invitation to regale himself for the remainder of
the day, in consideration of his services), and the constable.  The
latter gentleman had a large staff, a large head, large features, and
large half-boots; and he looked as if he had been taking a
proportionate allowance of ale--as indeed he had.

The adventures of the previous night were still under discussion; for
Mr. Giles was expatiating upon his presence of mind, when the doctor
entered; Mr. Brittles, with a mug of ale in his hand, was corroborating
everything, before his superior said it.

'Sit still!' said the doctor, waving his hand.

'Thank you, sir, said Mr. Giles.  'Misses wished some ale to be given
out, sir; and as I felt no ways inclined for my own little room, sir,
and was disposed for company, I am taking mine among 'em here.'

Brittles headed a low murmur, by which the ladies and gentlemen
generally were understood to express the gratification they derived
from Mr. Giles's condescension.  Mr. Giles looked round with a
patronising air, as much as to say that so long as they behaved
properly, he would never desert them.

'How is the patient to-night, sir?' asked Giles.

'So-so'; returned the doctor.  'I am afraid you have got yourself into
a scrape there, Mr. Giles.'

'I hope you don't mean to say, sir,' said Mr. Giles, trembling, 'that
he's going to die.  If I thought it, I should never be happy again.  I
wouldn't cut a boy off:  no, not even Brittles here; not for all the
plate in the county, sir.'

'That's not the point,' said the doctor, mysteriously.  'Mr. Giles, are
you a Protestant?'

'Yes, sir, I hope so,' faltered Mr. Giles, who had turned very pale.

'And what are _you_, boy?' said the doctor, turning sharply upon
Brittles.

'Lord bless me, sir!' replied Brittles, starting violently; 'I'm the
same as Mr. Giles, sir.'

'Then tell me this,' said the doctor, 'both of you, both of you! Are
you going to take upon yourselves to swear, that that boy upstairs is
the boy that was put through the little window last night?  Out with
it!  Come!  We are prepared for you!'

The doctor, who was universally considered one of the best-tempered
creatures on earth, made this demand in such a dreadful tone of anger,
that Giles and Brittles, who were considerably muddled by ale and
excitement, stared at each other in a state of stupefaction.

'Pay attention to the reply, constable, will you?' said the doctor,
shaking his forefinger with great solemnity of manner, and tapping the
bridge of his nose with it, to bespeak the exercise of that worthy's
utmost acuteness. 'Something may come of this before long.'

The constable looked as wise as he could, and took up his staff of
office: which had been reclining indolently in the chimney-corner.

'It's a simple question of identity, you will observe,' said the doctor.

'That's what it is, sir,' replied the constable, coughing with great
violence; for he had finished his ale in a hurry, and some of it had
gone the wrong way.

'Here's the house broken into,' said the doctor, 'and a couple of men
catch one moment's glimpse of a boy, in the midst of gunpowder smoke,
and in all the distraction of alarm and darkness.  Here's a boy comes
to that very same house, next morning, and because he happens to have
his arm tied up, these men lay violent hands upon him--by doing which,
they place his life in great danger--and swear he is the thief.  Now,
the question is, whether these men are justified by the fact; if not,
in what situation do they place themselves?'

The constable nodded profoundly.  He said, if that wasn't law, he would
be glad to know what was.

'I ask you again,' thundered the doctor, 'are you, on your solemn
oaths, able to identify that boy?'

Brittles looked doubtfully at Mr. Giles; Mr. Giles looked doubtfully at
Brittles; the constable put his hand behind his ear, to catch the
reply; the two women and the tinker leaned forward to listen; the
doctor glanced keenly round; when a ring was heard at the gate, and at
the same moment, the sound of wheels.

'It's the runners!' cried Brittles, to all appearance much relieved.

'The what?' exclaimed the doctor, aghast in his turn.

'The Bow Street officers, sir,' replied Brittles, taking up a candle;
'me and Mr. Giles sent for 'em this morning.'

'What?' cried the doctor.

'Yes,' replied Brittles; 'I sent a message up by the coachman, and I
only wonder they weren't here before, sir.'

'You did, did you?  Then confound your--slow coaches down here; that's
all,' said the doctor, walking away.



CHAPTER XXXI

INVOLVES A CRITICAL POSITION

'Who's that?' inquired Brittles, opening the door a little way, with
the chain up, and peeping out, shading the candle with his hand.

'Open the door,' replied a man outside; 'it's the officers from Bow
Street, as was sent to to-day.'

Much comforted by this assurance, Brittles opened the door to its full
width, and confronted a portly man in a great-coat; who walked in,
without saying anything more, and wiped his shoes on the mat, as coolly
as if he lived there.

'Just send somebody out to relieve my mate, will you, young man?' said
the officer; 'he's in the gig, a-minding the prad.  Have you got a
coach 'us here, that you could put it up in, for five or ten minutes?'

Brittles replying in the affirmative, and pointing out the building,
the portly man stepped back to the garden-gate, and helped his
companion to put up the gig:  while Brittles lighted them, in a state
of great admiration.  This done, they returned to the house, and, being
shown into a parlour, took off their great-coats and hats, and showed
like what they were.

The man who had knocked at the door, was a stout personage of middle
height, aged about fifty: with shiny black hair, cropped pretty close;
half-whiskers, a round face, and sharp eyes.  The other was a
red-headed, bony man, in top-boots; with a rather ill-favoured
countenance, and a turned-up sinister-looking nose.

'Tell your governor that Blathers and Duff is here, will you?' said the
stouter man, smoothing down his hair, and laying a pair of handcuffs on
the table.  'Oh!  Good-evening, master.  Can I have a word or two with
you in private, if you please?'

This was addressed to Mr. Losberne, who now made his appearance; that
gentleman, motioning Brittles to retire, brought in the two ladies, and
shut the door.

'This is the lady of the house,' said Mr. Losberne, motioning towards
Mrs. Maylie.

Mr. Blathers made a bow.  Being desired to sit down, he put his hat on
the floor, and taking a chair, motioned to Duff to do the same.  The
latter gentleman, who did not appear quite so much accustomed to good
society, or quite so much at his ease in it--one of the two--seated
himself, after undergoing several muscular affections of the limbs, and
the head of his stick into his mouth, with some embarrassment.

'Now, with regard to this here robbery, master,' said Blathers. 'What
are the circumstances?'

Mr. Losberne, who appeared desirous of gaining time, recounted them at
great length, and with much circumlocution.  Messrs. Blathers and Duff
looked very knowing meanwhile, and occasionally exchanged a nod.

'I can't say, for certain, till I see the work, of course,' said
Blathers; 'but my opinion at once is,--I don't mind committing myself
to that extent,--that this wasn't done by a yokel; eh, Duff?'

'Certainly not,' replied Duff.

'And, translating the word yokel for the benefit of the ladies, I
apprehend your meaning to be, that this attempt was not made by a
countryman?' said Mr. Losberne, with a smile.

'That's it, master,' replied Blathers.  'This is all about the robbery,
is it?'

'All,' replied the doctor.

'Now, what is this, about this here boy that the servants are a-talking
on?' said Blathers.

'Nothing at all,' replied the doctor.  'One of the frightened servants
chose to take it into his head, that he had something to do with this
attempt to break into the house; but it's nonsense: sheer absurdity.'

'Wery easy disposed of, if it is,' remarked Duff.

'What he says is quite correct,' observed Blathers, nodding his head in
a confirmatory way, and playing carelessly with the handcuffs, as if
they were a pair of castanets.  'Who is the boy? What account does he
give of himself?  Where did he come from? He didn't drop out of the
clouds, did he, master?'

'Of course not,' replied the doctor, with a nervous glance at the two
ladies.  'I know his whole history: but we can talk about that
presently.  You would like, first, to see the place where the thieves
made their attempt, I suppose?'

'Certainly,' rejoined Mr. Blathers.  'We had better inspect the
premises first, and examine the servants afterwards. That's the usual
way of doing business.'

Lights were then procured; and Messrs. Blathers and Duff, attended by
the native constable, Brittles, Giles, and everybody else in short,
went into the little room at the end of the passage and looked out at
the window; and afterwards went round by way of the lawn, and looked in
at the window; and after that, had a candle handed out to inspect the
shutter with; and after that, a lantern to trace the footsteps with;
and after that, a pitchfork to poke the bushes with.  This done, amidst
the breathless interest of all beholders, they came in again; and Mr.
Giles and Brittles were put through a melodramatic representation of
their share in the previous night's adventures: which they performed
some six times over: contradicting each other, in not more than one
important respect, the first time, and in not more than a dozen the
last.  This consummation being arrived at, Blathers and Duff cleared
the room, and held a long council together, compared with which, for
secrecy and solemnity, a consultation of great doctors on the knottiest
point in medicine, would be mere child's play.

Meanwhile, the doctor walked up and down the next room in a very uneasy
state; and Mrs. Maylie and Rose looked on, with anxious faces.

'Upon my word,' he said, making a halt, after a great number of very
rapid turns, 'I hardly know what to do.'

'Surely,' said Rose, 'the poor child's story, faithfully repeated to
these men, will be sufficient to exonerate him.'

'I doubt it, my dear young lady,' said the doctor, shaking his head.
'I don't think it would exonerate him, either with them, or with legal
functionaries of a higher grade.  What is he, after all, they would
say?  A runaway.  Judged by mere worldly considerations and
probabilities, his story is a very doubtful one.'

'You believe it, surely?' interrupted Rose.

'_I_ believe it, strange as it is; and perhaps I may be an old fool for
doing so,' rejoined the doctor; 'but I don't think it is exactly the
tale for a practical police-officer, nevertheless.'

'Why not?' demanded Rose.

'Because, my pretty cross-examiner,' replied the doctor: 'because,
viewed with their eyes, there are many ugly points about it; he can
only prove the parts that look ill, and none of those that look well.
Confound the fellows, they _will_ have the why and the wherefore, and
will take nothing for granted.  On his own showing, you see, he has
been the companion of thieves for some time past; he has been carried
to a police-officer, on a charge of picking a gentleman's pocket; he
has been taken away, forcibly, from that gentleman's house, to a place
which he cannot describe or point out, and of the situation of which he
has not the remotest idea.  He is brought down to Chertsey, by men who
seem to have taken a violent fancy to him, whether he will or no; and
is put through a window to rob a house; and then, just at the very
moment when he is going to alarm the inmates, and so do the very thing
that would set him all to rights, there rushes into the way, a
blundering dog of a half-bred butler, and shoots him! As if on purpose
to prevent his doing any good for himself! Don't you see all this?'

'I see it, of course,' replied Rose, smiling at the doctor's
impetuosity; 'but still I do not see anything in it, to criminate the
poor child.'

'No,' replied the doctor; 'of course not!  Bless the bright eyes of
your sex!  They never see, whether for good or bad, more than one side
of any question; and that is, always, the one which first presents
itself to them.'

Having given vent to this result of experience, the doctor put his
hands into his pockets, and walked up and down the room with even
greater rapidity than before.

'The more I think of it,' said the doctor, 'the more I see that it will
occasion endless trouble and difficulty if we put these men in
possession of the boy's real story.  I am certain it will not be
believed; and even if they can do nothing to him in the end, still the
dragging it forward, and giving publicity to all the doubts that will
be cast upon it, must interfere, materially, with your benevolent plan
of rescuing him from misery.'

'Oh! what is to be done?' cried Rose.  'Dear, dear! why did they send
for these people?'

'Why, indeed!' exclaimed Mrs. Maylie.  'I would not have had them here,
for the world.'

'All I know is,' said Mr. Losberne, at last:  sitting down with a kind
of desperate calmness, 'that we must try and carry it off with a bold
face.  The object is a good one, and that must be our excuse.  The boy
has strong symptoms of fever upon him, and is in no condition to be
talked to any more; that's one comfort.  We must make the best of it;
and if bad be the best, it is no fault of ours.  Come in!'

'Well, master,' said Blathers, entering the room followed by his
colleague, and making the door fast, before he said any more. 'This
warn't a put-up thing.'

'And what the devil's a put-up thing?' demanded the doctor, impatiently.

'We call it a put-up robbery, ladies,' said Blathers, turning to them,
as if he pitied their ignorance, but had a contempt for the doctor's,
'when the servants is in it.'

'Nobody suspected them, in this case,' said Mrs. Maylie.

'Wery likely not, ma'am,' replied Blathers; 'but they might have been
in it, for all that.'

'More likely on that wery account,' said Duff.

'We find it was a town hand,' said Blathers, continuing his report;
'for the style of work is first-rate.'

'Wery pretty indeed it is,' remarked Duff, in an undertone.

'There was two of 'em in it,' continued Blathers; 'and they had a boy
with 'em; that's plain from the size of the window.  That's all to be
said at present.  We'll see this lad that you've got upstairs at once,
if you please.'

'Perhaps they will take something to drink first, Mrs. Maylie?' said
the doctor: his face brightening, as if some new thought had occurred
to him.

'Oh! to be sure!' exclaimed Rose, eagerly.  'You shall have it
immediately, if you will.'

'Why, thank you, miss!' said Blathers, drawing his coat-sleeve across
his mouth; 'it's dry work, this sort of duty.  Anythink that's handy,
miss; don't put yourself out of the way, on our accounts.'

'What shall it be?' asked the doctor, following the young lady to the
sideboard.

'A little drop of spirits, master, if it's all the same,' replied
Blathers.  'It's a cold ride from London, ma'am; and I always find that
spirits comes home warmer to the feelings.'

This interesting communication was addressed to Mrs. Maylie, who
received it very graciously.  While it was being conveyed to her, the
doctor slipped out of the room.

'Ah!' said Mr. Blathers:  not holding his wine-glass by the stem, but
grasping the bottom between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand:
and placing it in front of his chest; 'I have seen a good many pieces
of business like this, in my time, ladies.'

'That crack down in the back lane at Edmonton, Blathers,' said Mr.
Duff, assisting his colleague's memory.

'That was something in this way, warn't it?' rejoined Mr. Blathers;
'that was done by Conkey Chickweed, that was.'

'You always gave that to him' replied Duff.  'It was the Family Pet, I
tell you.  Conkey hadn't any more to do with it than I had.'

'Get out!' retorted Mr. Blathers; 'I know better.  Do you mind that
time when Conkey was robbed of his money, though?  What a start that
was!  Better than any novel-book _I_ ever see!'

'What was that?' inquired Rose:  anxious to encourage any symptoms of
good-humour in the unwelcome visitors.

'It was a robbery, miss, that hardly anybody would have been down
upon,' said Blathers.  'This here Conkey Chickweed--'

'Conkey means Nosey, ma'am,' interposed Duff.

'Of course the lady knows that, don't she?' demanded Mr. Blathers.
'Always interrupting, you are, partner!  This here Conkey Chickweed,
miss, kept a public-house over Battlebridge way, and he had a cellar,
where a good many young lords went to see cock-fighting, and
badger-drawing, and that; and a wery intellectual manner the sports was
conducted in, for I've seen 'em off'en.  He warn't one of the family,
at that time; and one night he was robbed of three hundred and
twenty-seven guineas in a canvas bag, that was stole out of his bedroom
in the dead of night, by a tall man with a black patch over his eye,
who had concealed himself under the bed, and after committing the
robbery, jumped slap out of window:  which was only a story high. He
was wery quick about it.  But Conkey was quick, too; for he fired a
blunderbuss arter him, and roused the neighbourhood. They set up a
hue-and-cry, directly, and when they came to look about 'em, found that
Conkey had hit the robber; for there was traces of blood, all the way
to some palings a good distance off; and there they lost 'em.  However,
he had made off with the blunt; and, consequently, the name of Mr.
Chickweed, licensed witler, appeared in the Gazette among the other
bankrupts; and all manner of benefits and subscriptions, and I don't
know what all, was got up for the poor man, who was in a wery low state
of mind about his loss, and went up and down the streets, for three or
four days, a pulling his hair off in such a desperate manner that many
people was afraid he might be going to make away with himself. One day
he came up to the office, all in a hurry, and had a private interview
with the magistrate, who, after a deal of talk, rings the bell, and
orders Jem Spyers in (Jem was a active officer), and tells him to go
and assist Mr. Chickweed in apprehending the man as robbed his house.
"I see him, Spyers," said Chickweed, "pass my house yesterday morning,"
"Why didn't you up, and collar him!" says Spyers.  "I was so struck all
of a heap, that you might have fractured my skull with a toothpick,"
says the poor man; "but we're sure to have him; for between ten and
eleven o'clock at night he passed again."  Spyers no sooner heard this,
than he put some clean linen and a comb, in his pocket, in case he
should have to stop a day or two; and away he goes, and sets himself
down at one of the public-house windows behind the little red curtain,
with his hat on, all ready to bolt out, at a moment's notice. He was
smoking his pipe here, late at night, when all of a sudden Chickweed
roars out, "Here he is! Stop thief!  Murder!"  Jem Spyers dashes out;
and there he sees Chickweed, a-tearing down the street full cry.  Away
goes Spyers; on goes Chickweed; round turns the people; everybody roars
out, "Thieves!" and Chickweed himself keeps on shouting, all the time,
like mad.  Spyers loses sight of him a minute as he turns a corner;
shoots round; sees a little crowd; dives in; "Which is the man?"
"D--me!" says Chickweed, "I've lost him again!"  It was a remarkable
occurrence, but he warn't to be seen nowhere, so they went back to the
public-house. Next morning, Spyers took his old place, and looked out,
from behind the curtain, for a tall man with a black patch over his
eye, till his own two eyes ached again.  At last, he couldn't help
shutting 'em, to ease 'em a minute; and the very moment he did so, he
hears Chickweed a-roaring out, "Here he is!"  Off he starts once more,
with Chickweed half-way down the street ahead of him; and after twice
as long a run as the yesterday's one, the man's lost again!  This was
done, once or twice more, till one-half the neighbours gave out that
Mr. Chickweed had been robbed by the devil, who was playing tricks with
him arterwards; and the other half, that poor Mr. Chickweed had gone
mad with grief.'

'What did Jem Spyers say?' inquired the doctor; who had returned to the
room shortly after the commencement of the story.

'Jem Spyers,' resumed the officer, 'for a long time said nothing at
all, and listened to everything without seeming to, which showed he
understood his business.  But, one morning, he walked into the bar, and
taking out his snuffbox, says "Chickweed, I've found out who done this
here robbery."  "Have you?" said Chickweed.  "Oh, my dear Spyers, only
let me have wengeance, and I shall die contented!  Oh, my dear Spyers,
where is the villain!"  "Come!" said Spyers, offering him a pinch of
snuff, "none of that gammon!  You did it yourself."  So he had; and a
good bit of money he had made by it, too; and nobody would never have
found it out, if he hadn't been so precious anxious to keep up
appearances!' said Mr. Blathers, putting down his wine-glass, and
clinking the handcuffs together.

'Very curious, indeed,' observed the doctor.  'Now, if you please, you
can walk upstairs.'

'If _you_ please, sir,' returned Mr. Blathers.  Closely following Mr.
Losberne, the two officers ascended to Oliver's bedroom; Mr. Giles
preceding the party, with a lighted candle.

Oliver had been dozing; but looked worse, and was more feverish than he
had appeared yet.  Being assisted by the doctor, he managed to sit up
in bed for a minute or so; and looked at the strangers without at all
understanding what was going forward--in fact, without seeming to
recollect where he was, or what had been passing.

'This,' said Mr. Losberne, speaking softly, but with great vehemence
notwithstanding, 'this is the lad, who, being accidently wounded by a
spring-gun in some boyish trespass on Mr. What-d' ye-call-him's
grounds, at the back here, comes to the house for assistance this
morning, and is immediately laid hold of and maltreated, by that
ingenious gentleman with the candle in his hand:  who has placed his
life in considerable danger, as I can professionally certify.'

Messrs. Blathers and Duff looked at Mr. Giles, as he was thus
recommended to their notice.  The bewildered butler gazed from them
towards Oliver, and from Oliver towards Mr. Losberne, with a most
ludicrous mixture of fear and perplexity.

'You don't mean to deny that, I suppose?' said the doctor, laying
Oliver gently down again.

'It was all done for the--for the best, sir,' answered Giles. 'I am
sure I thought it was the boy, or I wouldn't have meddled with him.  I
am not of an inhuman disposition, sir.'

'Thought it was what boy?' inquired the senior officer.

'The housebreaker's boy, sir!' replied Giles.  'They--they certainly
had a boy.'

'Well?  Do you think so now?' inquired Blathers.

'Think what, now?' replied Giles, looking vacantly at his questioner.

'Think it's the same boy, Stupid-head?' rejoined Blathers, impatiently.

'I don't know; I really don't know,' said Giles, with a rueful
countenance.  'I couldn't swear to him.'

'What do you think?' asked Mr. Blathers.

'I don't know what to think,' replied poor Giles.  'I don't think it is
the boy; indeed, I'm almost certain that it isn't.  You know it can't
be.'

'Has this man been a-drinking, sir?' inquired Blathers, turning to the
doctor.

'What a precious muddle-headed chap you are!' said Duff, addressing Mr.
Giles, with supreme contempt.

Mr. Losberne had been feeling the patient's pulse during this short
dialogue; but he now rose from the chair by the bedside, and remarked,
that if the officers had any doubts upon the subject, they would
perhaps like to step into the next room, and have Brittles before them.

Acting upon this suggestion, they adjourned to a neighbouring
apartment, where Mr. Brittles, being called in, involved himself and
his respected superior in such a wonderful maze of fresh contradictions
and impossibilities, as tended to throw no particular light on
anything, but the fact of his own strong mystification; except, indeed,
his declarations that he shouldn't know the real boy, if he were put
before him that instant; that he had only taken Oliver to be he,
because Mr. Giles had said he was; and that Mr. Giles had, five minutes
previously, admitted in the kitchen, that he began to be very much
afraid he had been a little too hasty.

Among other ingenious surmises, the question was then raised, whether
Mr. Giles had really hit anybody; and upon examination of the fellow
pistol to that which he had fired, it turned out to have no more
destructive loading than gunpowder and brown paper: a discovery which
made a considerable impression on everybody but the doctor, who had
drawn the ball about ten minutes before. Upon no one, however, did it
make a greater impression than on Mr. Giles himself; who, after
labouring, for some hours, under the fear of having mortally wounded a
fellow-creature, eagerly caught at this new idea, and favoured it to
the utmost.  Finally, the officers, without troubling themselves very
much about Oliver, left the Chertsey constable in the house, and took
up their rest for that night in the town; promising to return the next
morning.

With the next morning, there came a rumour, that two men and a boy were
in the cage at Kingston, who had been apprehended over night under
suspicious circumstances; and to Kingston Messrs. Blathers and Duff
journeyed accordingly. The suspicious circumstances, however, resolving
themselves, on investigation, into the one fact, that they had been
discovered sleeping under a haystack; which, although a great crime, is
only punishable by imprisonment, and is, in the merciful eye of the
English law, and its comprehensive love of all the King's subjects,
held to be no satisfactory proof, in the absence of all other evidence,
that the sleeper, or sleepers, have committed burglary accompanied with
violence, and have therefore rendered themselves liable to the
punishment of death; Messrs. Blathers and Duff came back again, as wise
as they went.

In short, after some more examination, and a great deal more
conversation, a neighbouring magistrate was readily induced to take the
joint bail of Mrs. Maylie and Mr. Losberne for Oliver's appearance if
he should ever be called upon; and Blathers and Duff, being rewarded
with a couple of guineas, returned to town with divided opinions on the
subject of their expedition: the latter gentleman on a mature
consideration of all the circumstances, inclining to the belief that
the burglarious attempt had originated with the Family Pet; and the
former being equally disposed to concede the full merit of it to the
great Mr. Conkey Chickweed.

Meanwhile, Oliver gradually throve and prospered under the united care
of Mrs. Maylie, Rose, and the kind-hearted Mr. Losberne.  If fervent
prayers, gushing from hearts overcharged with gratitude, be heard in
heaven--and if they be not, what prayers are!--the blessings which the
orphan child called down upon them, sunk into their souls, diffusing
peace and happiness.



CHAPTER XXXII

OF THE HAPPY LIFE OLIVER BEGAN TO LEAD WITH HIS KIND FRIENDS

Oliver's ailings were neither slight nor few.  In addition to the pain
and delay attendant on a broken limb, his exposure to the wet and cold
had brought on fever and ague:  which hung about him for many weeks,
and reduced him sadly. But, at length, he began, by slow degrees, to
get better, and to be able to say sometimes, in a few tearful words,
how deeply he felt the goodness of the two sweet ladies, and how
ardently he hoped that when he grew strong and well again, he could do
something to show his gratitude; only something, which would let them
see the love and duty with which his breast was full; something,
however slight, which would prove to them that their gentle kindness
had not been cast away; but that the poor boy whom their charity had
rescued from misery, or death, was eager to serve them with his whole
heart and soul.

'Poor fellow!' said Rose, when Oliver had been one day feebly
endeavouring to utter the words of thankfulness that rose to his pale
lips; 'you shall have many opportunities of serving us, if you will.
We are going into the country, and my aunt intends that you shall
accompany us.  The quiet place, the pure air, and all the pleasure and
beauties of spring, will restore you in a few days.  We will employ you
in a hundred ways, when you can bear the trouble.'

'The trouble!' cried Oliver.  'Oh! dear lady, if I could but work for
you; if I could only give you pleasure by watering your flowers, or
watching your birds, or running up and down the whole day long, to make
you happy; what would I give to do it!'

'You shall give nothing at all,' said Miss Maylie, smiling; 'for, as I
told you before, we shall employ you in a hundred ways; and if you only
take half the trouble to please us, that you promise now, you will make
me very happy indeed.'

'Happy, ma'am!' cried Oliver; 'how kind of you to say so!'

'You will make me happier than I can tell you,' replied the young lady.
'To think that my dear good aunt should have been the means of rescuing
any one from such sad misery as you have described to us, would be an
unspeakable pleasure to me; but to know that the object of her goodness
and compassion was sincerely grateful and attached, in consequence,
would delight me, more than you can well imagine.  Do you understand
me?' she inquired, watching Oliver's thoughtful face.

'Oh yes, ma'am, yes!' replied Oliver eagerly; 'but I was thinking that
I am ungrateful now.'

'To whom?' inquired the young lady.

'To the kind gentleman, and the dear old nurse, who took so much care
of me before,' rejoined Oliver.  'If they knew how happy I am, they
would be pleased, I am sure.'

'I am sure they would,' rejoined Oliver's benefactress; 'and Mr.
Losberne has already been kind enough to promise that when you are well
enough to bear the journey, he will carry you to see them.'

'Has he, ma'am?' cried Oliver, his face brightening with pleasure.  'I
don't know what I shall do for joy when I see their kind faces once
again!'

In a short time Oliver was sufficiently recovered to undergo the
fatigue of this expedition.  One morning he and Mr. Losberne set out,
accordingly, in a little carriage which belonged to Mrs. Maylie.  When
they came to Chertsey Bridge, Oliver turned very pale, and uttered a
loud exclamation.

'What's the matter with the boy?' cried the doctor, as usual, all in a
bustle.  'Do you see anything--hear anything--feel anything--eh?'

'That, sir,' cried Oliver, pointing out of the carriage window. 'That
house!'

'Yes; well, what of it?  Stop coachman.  Pull up here,' cried the
doctor.  'What of the house, my man; eh?'

'The thieves--the house they took me to!' whispered Oliver.

'The devil it is!' cried the doctor.  'Hallo, there! let me out!'

But, before the coachman could dismount from his box, he had tumbled
out of the coach, by some means or other; and, running down to the
deserted tenement, began kicking at the door like a madman.

'Halloa?' said a little ugly hump-backed man:  opening the door so
suddenly, that the doctor, from the very impetus of his last kick,
nearly fell forward into the passage. 'What's the matter here?'

'Matter!' exclaimed the other, collaring him, without a moment's
reflection.  'A good deal.  Robbery is the matter.'

'There'll be Murder the matter, too,' replied the hump-backed man,
coolly, 'if you don't take your hands off.  Do you hear me?'

'I hear you,' said the doctor, giving his captive a hearty shake.

'Where's--confound the fellow, what's his rascally name--Sikes; that's
it.  Where's Sikes, you thief?'

The hump-backed man stared, as if in excess of amazement and
indignation; then, twisting himself, dexterously, from the doctor's
grasp, growled forth a volley of horrid oaths, and retired into the
house.  Before he could shut the door, however, the doctor had passed
into the parlour, without a word of parley.

He looked anxiously round; not an article of furniture; not a vestige
of anything, animate or inanimate; not even the position of the
cupboards; answered Oliver's description!

'Now!' said the hump-backed man, who had watched him keenly, 'what do
you mean by coming into my house, in this violent way? Do you want to
rob me, or to murder me?  Which is it?'

'Did you ever know a man come out to do either, in a chariot and pair,
you ridiculous old vampire?' said the irritable doctor.

'What do you want, then?' demanded the hunchback.  'Will you take
yourself off, before I do you a mischief?  Curse you!'

'As soon as I think proper,' said Mr. Losberne, looking into the other
parlour; which, like the first, bore no resemblance whatever to
Oliver's account of it.  'I shall find you out, some day, my friend.'

'Will you?' sneered the ill-favoured cripple.  'If you ever want me,
I'm here.  I haven't lived here mad and all alone, for five-and-twenty
years, to be scared by you.  You shall pay for this; you shall pay for
this.'  And so saying, the mis-shapen little demon set up a yell, and
danced upon the ground, as if wild with rage.

'Stupid enough, this,' muttered the doctor to himself; 'the boy must
have made a mistake.  Here!  Put that in your pocket, and shut yourself
up again.'  With these words he flung the hunchback a piece of money,
and returned to the carriage.

The man followed to the chariot door, uttering the wildest imprecations
and curses all the way; but as Mr. Losberne turned to speak to the
driver, he looked into the carriage, and eyed Oliver for an instant
with a glance so sharp and fierce and at the same time so furious and
vindictive, that, waking or sleeping, he could not forget it for months
afterwards.  He continued to utter the most fearful imprecations, until
the driver had resumed his seat; and when they were once more on their
way, they could see him some distance behind: beating his feet upon the
ground, and tearing his hair, in transports of real or pretended rage.

'I am an ass!' said the doctor, after a long silence.  'Did you know
that before, Oliver?'

'No, sir.'

'Then don't forget it another time.'

'An ass,' said the doctor again, after a further silence of some
minutes.  'Even if it had been the right place, and the right fellows
had been there, what could I have done, single-handed? And if I had had
assistance, I see no good that I should have done, except leading to my
own exposure, and an unavoidable statement of the manner in which I
have hushed up this business. That would have served me right, though.
I am always involving myself in some scrape or other, by acting on
impulse.  It might have done me good.'

Now, the fact was that the excellent doctor had never acted upon
anything but impulse all through his life, and it was no bad compliment
to the nature of the impulses which governed him, that so far from
being involved in any peculiar troubles or misfortunes, he had the
warmest respect and esteem of all who knew him.  If the truth must be
told, he was a little out of temper, for a minute or two, at being
disappointed in procuring corroborative evidence of Oliver's story on
the very first occasion on which he had a chance of obtaining any.  He
soon came round again, however; and finding that Oliver's replies to
his questions, were still as straightforward and consistent, and still
delivered with as much apparent sincerity and truth, as they had ever
been, he made up his mind to attach full credence to them, from that
time forth.

As Oliver knew the name of the street in which Mr. Brownlow resided,
they were enabled to drive straight thither.  When the coach turned
into it, his heart beat so violently, that he could scarcely draw his
breath.

'Now, my boy, which house is it?' inquired Mr. Losberne.

'That!  That!' replied Oliver, pointing eagerly out of the window.
'The white house.  Oh! make haste!  Pray make haste! I feel as if I
should die: it makes me tremble so.'

'Come, come!' said the good doctor, patting him on the shoulder. 'You
will see them directly, and they will be overjoyed to find you safe and
well.'

'Oh!  I hope so!' cried Oliver.  'They were so good to me; so very,
very good to me.'

The coach rolled on.  It stopped.  No; that was the wrong house; the
next door.  It went on a few paces, and stopped again. Oliver looked up
at the windows, with tears of happy expectation coursing down his face.

Alas! the white house was empty, and there was a bill in the window.
'To Let.'

'Knock at the next door,' cried Mr. Losberne, taking Oliver's arm in
his.  'What has become of Mr. Brownlow, who used to live in the
adjoining house, do you know?'

The servant did not know; but would go and inquire.  She presently
returned, and said, that Mr. Brownlow had sold off his goods, and gone
to the West Indies, six weeks before.  Oliver clasped his hands, and
sank feebly backward.

'Has his housekeeper gone too?' inquired Mr. Losberne, after a moment's
pause.

'Yes, sir'; replied the servant.  'The old gentleman, the housekeeper,
and a gentleman who was a friend of Mr. Brownlow's, all went together.'

'Then turn towards home again,' said Mr. Losberne to the driver; 'and
don't stop to bait the horses, till you get out of this confounded
London!'

'The book-stall keeper, sir?' said Oliver.  'I know the way there.  See
him, pray, sir!  Do see him!'

'My poor boy, this is disappointment enough for one day,' said the
doctor.  'Quite enough for both of us.  If we go to the book-stall
keeper's, we shall certainly find that he is dead, or has set his house
on fire, or run away.  No; home again straight!'  And in obedience to
the doctor's impulse, home they went.

This bitter disappointment caused Oliver much sorrow and grief, even in
the midst of his happiness; for he had pleased himself, many times
during his illness, with thinking of all that Mr. Brownlow and Mrs.
Bedwin would say to him: and what delight it would be to tell them how
many long days and nights he had passed in reflecting on what they had
done for him, and in bewailing his cruel separation from them. The hope
of eventually clearing himself with them, too, and explaining how he
had been forced away, had buoyed him up, and sustained him, under many
of his recent trials; and now, the idea that they should have gone so
far, and carried with them the belief that he was an impostor and a
robber--a belief which might remain uncontradicted to his dying
day--was almost more than he could bear.

The circumstance occasioned no alteration, however, in the behaviour of
his benefactors.  After another fortnight, when the fine warm weather
had fairly begun, and every tree and flower was putting forth its young
leaves and rich blossoms, they made preparations for quitting the house
at Chertsey, for some months.

Sending the plate, which had so excited Fagin's cupidity, to the
banker's; and leaving Giles and another servant in care of the house,
they departed to a cottage at some distance in the country, and took
Oliver with them.

Who can describe the pleasure and delight, the peace of mind and soft
tranquillity, the sickly boy felt in the balmy air, and among the green
hills and rich woods, of an inland village!  Who can tell how scenes of
peace and quietude sink into the minds of pain-worn dwellers in close
and noisy places, and carry their own freshness, deep into their jaded
hearts!  Men who have lived in crowded, pent-up streets, through lives
of toil, and who have never wished for change; men, to whom custom has
indeed been second nature, and who have come almost to love each brick
and stone that formed the narrow boundaries of their daily walks; even
they, with the hand of death upon them, have been known to yearn at
last for one short glimpse of Nature's face; and, carried far from the
scenes of their old pains and pleasures, have seemed to pass at once
into a new state of being.  Crawling forth, from day to day, to some
green sunny spot, they have had such memories wakened up within them by
the sight of the sky, and hill and plain, and glistening water, that a
foretaste of heaven itself has soothed their quick decline, and they
have sunk into their tombs, as peacefully as the sun whose setting they
watched from their lonely chamber window but a few hours before, faded
from their dim and feeble sight!  The memories which peaceful country
scenes call up, are not of this world, nor of its thoughts and hopes.
Their gentle influence may teach us how to weave fresh garlands for the
graves of those we loved:  may purify our thoughts, and bear down
before it old enmity and hatred; but beneath all this, there lingers,
in the least reflective mind, a vague and half-formed consciousness of
having held such feelings long before, in some remote and distant time,
which calls up solemn thoughts of distant times to come, and bends down
pride and worldliness beneath it.

It was a lovely spot to which they repaired.  Oliver, whose days had
been spent among squalid crowds, and in the midst of noise and
brawling, seemed to enter on a new existence there.  The rose and
honeysuckle clung to the cottage walls; the ivy crept round the trunks
of the trees; and the garden-flowers perfumed the air with delicious
odours.  Hard by, was a little churchyard; not crowded with tall
unsightly gravestones, but full of humble mounds, covered with fresh
turf and moss: beneath which, the old people of the village lay at
rest.  Oliver often wandered here; and, thinking of the wretched grave
in which his mother lay, would sometimes sit him down and sob unseen;
but, when he raised his eyes to the deep sky overhead, he would cease
to think of her as lying in the ground, and would weep for her, sadly,
but without pain.

It was a happy time.  The days were peaceful and serene; the nights
brought with them neither fear nor care; no languishing in a wretched
prison, or associating with wretched men; nothing but pleasant and
happy thoughts.  Every morning he went to a white-headed old gentleman,
who lived near the little church: who taught him to read better, and to
write:  and who spoke so kindly, and took such pains, that Oliver could
never try enough to please him.  Then, he would walk with Mrs. Maylie
and Rose, and hear them talk of books; or perhaps sit near them, in
some shady place, and listen whilst the young lady read: which he could
have done, until it grew too dark to see the letters. Then, he had his
own lesson for the next day to prepare; and at this, he would work
hard, in a little room which looked into the garden, till evening came
slowly on, when the ladies would walk out again, and he with them:
listening with such pleasure to all they said:  and so happy if they
wanted a flower that he could climb to reach, or had forgotten anything
he could run to fetch: that he could never be quick enough about it.
When it became quite dark, and they returned home, the young lady would
sit down to the piano, and play some pleasant air, or sing, in a low
and gentle voice, some old song which it pleased her aunt to hear.
There would be no candles lighted at such times as these; and Oliver
would sit by one of the windows, listening to the sweet music, in a
perfect rapture.

And when Sunday came, how differently the day was spent, from any way
in which he had ever spent it yet! and how happily too; like all the
other days in that most happy time!  There was the little church, in
the morning, with the green leaves fluttering at the windows:  the
birds singing without:  and the sweet-smelling air stealing in at the
low porch, and filling the homely building with its fragrance. The poor
people were so neat and clean, and knelt so reverently in prayer, that
it seemed a pleasure, not a tedious duty, their assembling there
together; and though the singing might be rude, it was real, and
sounded more musical (to Oliver's ears at least) than any he had ever
heard in church before.  Then, there were the walks as usual, and many
calls at the clean houses of the labouring men; and at night, Oliver
read a chapter or two from the Bible, which he had been studying all
the week, and in the performance of which duty he felt more proud and
pleased, than if he had been the clergyman himself.

In the morning, Oliver would be a-foot by six o'clock, roaming the
fields, and plundering the hedges, far and wide, for nosegays of wild
flowers, with which he would return laden, home; and which it took
great care and consideration to arrange, to the best advantage, for the
embellishment of the breakfast-table. There was fresh groundsel, too,
for Miss Maylie's birds, with which Oliver, who had been studying the
subject under the able tuition of the village clerk, would decorate the
cages, in the most approved taste. When the birds were made all spruce
and smart for the day, there was usually some little commission of
charity to execute in the village; or, failing that, there was rare
cricket-playing, sometimes, on the green; or, failing that, there was
always something to do in the garden, or about the plants, to which
Oliver (who had studied this science also, under the same master, who
was a gardener by trade,) applied himself with hearty good-will, until
Miss Rose made her appearance:  when there were a thousand
commendations to be bestowed on all he had done.

So three months glided away; three months which, in the life of the
most blessed and favoured of mortals, might have been unmingled
happiness, and which, in Oliver's were true felicity. With the purest
and most amiable generosity on one side; and the truest, warmest,
soul-felt gratitude on the other; it is no wonder that, by the end of
that short time, Oliver Twist had become completely domesticated with
the old lady and her niece, and that the fervent attachment of his
young and sensitive heart, was repaid by their pride in, and attachment
to, himself.



CHAPTER XXXIII

WHEREIN THE HAPPINESS OF OLIVER AND HIS FRIENDS, EXPERIENCES A SUDDEN
CHECK

Spring flew swiftly by, and summer came.  If the village had been
beautiful at first it was now in the full glow and luxuriance of its
richness.  The great trees, which had looked shrunken and bare in the
earlier months, had now burst into strong life and health; and
stretching forth their green arms over the thirsty ground, converted
open and naked spots into choice nooks, where was a deep and pleasant
shade from which to look upon the wide prospect, steeped in sunshine,
which lay stretched beyond.  The earth had donned her mantle of
brightest green; and shed her richest perfumes abroad.  It was the
prime and vigour of the year; all things were glad and flourishing.

Still, the same quiet life went on at the little cottage, and the same
cheerful serenity prevailed among its inmates.  Oliver had long since
grown stout and healthy; but health or sickness made no difference in
his warm feelings of a great many people.  He was still the same
gentle, attached, affectionate creature that he had been when pain and
suffering had wasted his strength, and when he was dependent for every
slight attention, and comfort on those who tended him.

One beautiful night, when they had taken a longer walk than was
customary with them:  for the day had been unusually warm, and there
was a brilliant moon, and a light wind had sprung up, which was
unusually refreshing.  Rose had been in high spirits, too, and they had
walked on, in merry conversation, until they had far exceeded their
ordinary bounds.  Mrs. Maylie being fatigued, they returned more slowly
home.  The young lady merely throwing off her simple bonnet, sat down
to the piano as usual.  After running abstractedly over the keys for a
few minutes, she fell into a low and very solemn air; and as she played
it, they heard a sound as if she were weeping.

'Rose, my dear!' said the elder lady.

Rose made no reply, but played a little quicker, as though the words
had roused her from some painful thoughts.

'Rose, my love!' cried Mrs. Maylie, rising hastily, and bending over
her.  'What is this?  In tears!  My dear child, what distresses you?'

'Nothing, aunt; nothing,' replied the young lady.  'I don't know what
it is; I can't describe it; but I feel--'

'Not ill, my love?' interposed Mrs. Maylie.

'No, no!  Oh, not ill!' replied Rose: shuddering as though some deadly
chillness were passing over her, while she spoke; 'I shall be better
presently.  Close the window, pray!'

Oliver hastened to comply with her request.  The young lady, making an
effort to recover her cheerfulness, strove to play some livelier tune;
but her fingers dropped powerless over the keys. Covering her face with
her hands, she sank upon a sofa, and gave vent to the tears which she
was now unable to repress.

'My child!' said the elderly lady, folding her arms about her, 'I never
saw you so before.'

'I would not alarm you if I could avoid it,' rejoined Rose; 'but indeed
I have tried very hard, and cannot help this. I fear I _am_ ill, aunt.'

She was, indeed; for, when candles were brought, they saw that in the
very short time which had elapsed since their return home, the hue of
her countenance had changed to a marble whiteness. Its expression had
lost nothing of its beauty; but it was changed; and there was an
anxious haggard look about the gentle face, which it had never worn
before.  Another minute, and it was suffused with a crimson flush:  and
a heavy wildness came over the soft blue eye.  Again this disappeared,
like the shadow thrown by a passing cloud; and she was once more deadly
pale.

Oliver, who watched the old lady anxiously, observed that she was
alarmed by these appearances; and so in truth, was he; but seeing that
she affected to make light of them, he endeavoured to do the same, and
they so far succeeded, that when Rose was persuaded by her aunt to
retire for the night, she was in better spirits; and appeared even in
better health:  assuring them that she felt certain she should rise in
the morning, quite well.

'I hope,' said Oliver, when Mrs. Maylie returned, 'that nothing is the
matter?  She don't look well to-night, but--'

The old lady motioned to him not to speak; and sitting herself down in
a dark corner of the room, remained silent for some time. At length,
she said, in a trembling voice:

'I hope not, Oliver.  I have been very happy with her for some years:
too happy, perhaps.  It may be time that I should meet with some
misfortune; but I hope it is not this.'

'What?' inquired Oliver.

'The heavy blow,' said the old lady, 'of losing the dear girl who has
so long been my comfort and happiness.'

'Oh!  God forbid!' exclaimed Oliver, hastily.

'Amen to that, my child!' said the old lady, wringing her hands.

'Surely there is no danger of anything so dreadful?' said Oliver. 'Two
hours ago, she was quite well.'

'She is very ill now,' rejoined Mrs. Maylies; 'and will be worse, I am
sure.  My dear, dear Rose!  Oh, what shall I do without her!'

She gave way to such great grief, that Oliver, suppressing his own
emotion, ventured to remonstrate with her; and to beg, earnestly, that,
for the sake of the dear young lady herself, she would be more calm.

'And consider, ma'am,' said Oliver, as the tears forced themselves into
his eyes, despite of his efforts to the contrary. 'Oh! consider how
young and good she is, and what pleasure and comfort she gives to all
about her.  I am sure--certain--quite certain--that, for your sake, who
are so good yourself; and for her own; and for the sake of all she
makes so happy; she will not die.  Heaven will never let her die so
young.'

'Hush!' said Mrs. Maylie, laying her hand on Oliver's head. 'You think
like a child, poor boy.  But you teach me my duty, notwithstanding.  I
had forgotten it for a moment, Oliver, but I hope I may be pardoned,
for I am old, and have seen enough of illness and death to know the
agony of separation from the objects of our love.  I have seen enough,
too, to know that it is not always the youngest and best who are spared
to those that love them; but this should give us comfort in our sorrow;
for Heaven is just; and such things teach us, impressively, that there
is a brighter world than this; and that the passage to it is speedy.
God's will be done!  I love her; and He knows how well!'

Oliver was surprised to see that as Mrs. Maylie said these words, she
checked her lamentations as though by one effort; and drawing herself
up as she spoke, became composed and firm.  He was still more
astonished to find that this firmness lasted; and that, under all the
care and watching which ensued, Mrs. Maylie was ever ready and
collected: performing all the duties which had devolved upon her,
steadily, and, to all external appearances, even cheerfully.  But he
was young, and did not know what strong minds are capable of, under
trying circumstances.  How should he, when their possessors so seldom
know themselves?

An anxious night ensued.  When morning came, Mrs. Maylie's predictions
were but too well verified.  Rose was in the first stage of a high and
dangerous fever.

'We must be active, Oliver, and not give way to useless grief,' said
Mrs. Maylie, laying her finger on her lip, as she looked steadily into
his face; 'this letter must be sent, with all possible expedition, to
Mr. Losberne.  It must be carried to the market-town: which is not more
than four miles off, by the footpath across the field:  and thence
dispatched, by an express on horseback, straight to Chertsey. The
people at the inn will undertake to do this: and I can trust to you to
see it done, I know.'

Oliver could make no reply, but looked his anxiety to be gone at once.

'Here is another letter,' said Mrs. Maylie, pausing to reflect; 'but
whether to send it now, or wait until I see how Rose goes on, I
scarcely know.  I would not forward it, unless I feared the worst.'

'Is it for Chertsey, too, ma'am?' inquired Oliver; impatient to execute
his commission, and holding out his trembling hand for the letter.

'No,' replied the old lady, giving it to him mechanically. Oliver
glanced at it, and saw that it was directed to Harry Maylie, Esquire,
at some great lord's house in the country; where, he could not make out.

'Shall it go, ma'am?' asked Oliver, looking up, impatiently.

'I think not,' replied Mrs. Maylie, taking it back.  'I will wait until
to-morrow.'

With these words, she gave Oliver her purse, and he started off,
without more delay, at the greatest speed he could muster.

Swiftly he ran across the fields, and down the little lanes which
sometimes divided them: now almost hidden by the high corn on either
side, and now emerging on an open field, where the mowers and haymakers
were busy at their work:  nor did he stop once, save now and then, for
a few seconds, to recover breath, until he came, in a great heat, and
covered with dust, on the little market-place of the market-town.

Here he paused, and looked about for the inn.  There were a white bank,
and a red brewery, and a yellow town-hall; and in one corner there was
a large house, with all the wood about it painted green:  before which
was the sign of 'The George.'  To this he hastened, as soon as it
caught his eye.

He spoke to a postboy who was dozing under the gateway; and who, after
hearing what he wanted, referred him to the ostler; who after hearing
all he had to say again, referred him to the landlord; who was a tall
gentleman in a blue neckcloth, a white hat, drab breeches, and boots
with tops to match, leaning against a pump by the stable-door, picking
his teeth with a silver toothpick.

This gentleman walked with much deliberation into the bar to make out
the bill:  which took a long time making out:  and after it was ready,
and paid, a horse had to be saddled, and a man to be dressed, which
took up ten good minutes more.  Meanwhile Oliver was in such a
desperate state of impatience and anxiety, that he felt as if he could
have jumped upon the horse himself, and galloped away, full tear, to
the next stage.  At length, all was ready; and the little parcel having
been handed up, with many injunctions and entreaties for its speedy
delivery, the man set spurs to his horse, and rattling over the uneven
paving of the market-place, was out of the town, and galloping along
the turnpike-road, in a couple of minutes.

As it was something to feel certain that assistance was sent for, and
that no time had been lost, Oliver hurried up the inn-yard, with a
somewhat lighter heart.  He was turning out of the gateway when he
accidently stumbled against a tall man wrapped in a cloak, who was at
that moment coming out of the inn door.

'Hah!' cried the man, fixing his eyes on Oliver, and suddenly
recoiling.  'What the devil's this?'

'I beg your pardon, sir,' said Oliver; 'I was in a great hurry to get
home, and didn't see you were coming.'

'Death!' muttered the man to himself, glaring at the boy with his large
dark eyes.  'Who would have thought it! Grind him to ashes! He'd start
up from a stone coffin, to come in my way!'

'I am sorry,' stammered Oliver, confused by the strange man's wild
look.  'I hope I have not hurt you!'

'Rot you!' murmured the man, in a horrible passion; between his
clenched teeth; 'if I had only had the courage to say the word, I might
have been free of you in a night.  Curses on your head, and black death
on your heart, you imp!  What are you doing here?'

The man shook his fist, as he uttered these words incoherently. He
advanced towards Oliver, as if with the intention of aiming a blow at
him, but fell violently on the ground:  writhing and foaming, in a fit.

Oliver gazed, for a moment, at the struggles of the madman (for such he
supposed him to be); and then darted into the house for help.  Having
seen him safely carried into the hotel, he turned his face homewards,
running as fast as he could, to make up for lost time:  and recalling
with a great deal of astonishment and some fear, the extraordinary
behaviour of the person from whom he had just parted.

The circumstance did not dwell in his recollection long, however: for
when he reached the cottage, there was enough to occupy his mind, and
to drive all considerations of self completely from his memory.

Rose Maylie had rapidly grown worse; before mid-night she was
delirious.  A medical practitioner, who resided on the spot, was in
constant attendance upon her; and after first seeing the patient, he
had taken Mrs. Maylie aside, and pronounced her disorder to be one of a
most alarming nature. 'In fact,' he said, 'it would be little short of
a miracle, if she recovered.'

How often did Oliver start from his bed that night, and stealing out,
with noiseless footstep, to the staircase, listen for the slightest
sound from the sick chamber!  How often did a tremble shake his frame,
and cold drops of terror start upon his brow, when a sudden trampling
of feet caused him to fear that something too dreadful to think of, had
even then occurred!  And what had been the fervency of all the prayers
he had ever muttered, compared with those he poured forth, now, in the
agony and passion of his supplication for the life and health of the
gentle creature, who was tottering on the deep grave's verge!

Oh! the suspense, the fearful, acute suspense, of standing idly by
while the life of one we dearly love, is trembling in the balance!  Oh!
the racking thoughts that crowd upon the mind, and make the heart beat
violently, and the breath come thick, by the force of the images they
conjure up before it; the desperate anxiety _to be doing something_ to
relieve the pain, or lessen the danger, which we have no power to
alleviate; the sinking of soul and spirit, which the sad remembrance of
our helplessness produces; what tortures can equal these; what
reflections or endeavours can, in the full tide and fever of the time,
allay them!

Morning came; and the little cottage was lonely and still. People spoke
in whispers; anxious faces appeared at the gate, from time to time;
women and children went away in tears. All the livelong day, and for
hours after it had grown dark, Oliver paced softly up and down the
garden, raising his eyes every instant to the sick chamber, and
shuddering to see the darkened window, looking as if death lay
stretched inside.  Late that night, Mr. Losberne arrived.  'It is
hard,' said the good doctor, turning away as he spoke; 'so young; so
much beloved; but there is very little hope.'

Another morning.  The sun shone brightly; as brightly as if it looked
upon no misery or care; and, with every leaf and flower in full bloom
about her; with life, and health, and sounds and sights of joy,
surrounding her on every side: the fair young creature lay, wasting
fast.  Oliver crept away to the old churchyard, and sitting down on one
of the green mounds, wept and prayed for her, in silence.

There was such peace and beauty in the scene; so much of brightness and
mirth in the sunny landscape; such blithesome music in the songs of the
summer birds; such freedom in the rapid flight of the rook, careering
overhead; so much of life and joyousness in all; that, when the boy
raised his aching eyes, and looked about, the thought instinctively
occurred to him, that this was not a time for death; that Rose could
surely never die when humbler things were all so glad and gay; that
graves were for cold and cheerless winter:  not for sunlight and
fragrance. He almost thought that shrouds were for the old and
shrunken; and that they never wrapped the young and graceful form in
their ghastly folds.

A knell from the church bell broke harshly on these youthful thoughts.
Another!  Again!  It was tolling for the funeral service.  A group of
humble mourners entered the gate: wearing white favours; for the corpse
was young.  They stood uncovered by a grave; and there was a mother--a
mother once--among the weeping train.  But the sun shone brightly, and
the birds sang on.

Oliver turned homeward, thinking on the many kindnesses he had received
from the young lady, and wishing that the time could come again, that
he might never cease showing her how grateful and attached he was.  He
had no cause for self-reproach on the score of neglect, or want of
thought, for he had been devoted to her service; and yet a hundred
little occasions rose up before him, on which he fancied he might have
been more zealous, and more earnest, and wished he had been.  We need
be careful how we deal with those about us, when every death carries to
some small circle of survivors, thoughts of so much omitted, and so
little done--of so many things forgotten, and so many more which might
have been repaired!  There is no remorse so deep as that which is
unavailing; if we would be spared its tortures, let us remember this,
in time.

When he reached home Mrs. Maylie was sitting in the little parlour.
Oliver's heart sank at sight of her; for she had never left the bedside
of her niece; and he trembled to think what change could have driven
her away.  He learnt that she had fallen into a deep sleep, from which
she would waken, either to recovery and life, or to bid them farewell,
and die.

They sat, listening, and afraid to speak, for hours.  The untasted meal
was removed, with looks which showed that their thoughts were
elsewhere, they watched the sun as he sank lower and lower, and, at
length, cast over sky and earth those brilliant hues which herald his
departure.  Their quick ears caught the sound of an approaching
footstep.  They both involuntarily darted to the door, as Mr. Losberne
entered.

'What of Rose?' cried the old lady.  'Tell me at once!  I can bear it;
anything but suspense!  Oh, tell me! in the name of Heaven!'

'You must compose yourself,' said the doctor supporting her. 'Be calm,
my dear ma'am, pray.'

'Let me go, in God's name!  My dear child!  She is dead! She is dying!'

'No!' cried the doctor, passionately.  'As He is good and merciful, she
will live to bless us all, for years to come.'

The lady fell upon her knees, and tried to fold her hands together; but
the energy which had supported her so long, fled up to Heaven with her
first thanksgiving; and she sank into the friendly arms which were
extended to receive her.



CHAPTER XXXIV

CONTAINS SOME INTRODUCTORY PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO A YOUNG GENTLEMAN
WHO NOW ARRIVES UPON THE SCENE; AND A NEW ADVENTURE WHICH HAPPENED TO
OLIVER

It was almost too much happiness to bear.  Oliver felt stunned and
stupefied by the unexpected intelligence; he could not weep, or speak,
or rest.  He had scarcely the power of understanding anything that had
passed, until, after a long ramble in the quiet evening air, a burst of
tears came to his relief, and he seemed to awaken, all at once, to a
full sense of the joyful change that had occurred, and the almost
insupportable load of anguish which had been taken from his breast.

The night was fast closing in, when he returned homeward:  laden with
flowers which he had culled, with peculiar care, for the adornment of
the sick chamber.  As he walked briskly along the road, he heard behind
him, the noise of some vehicle, approaching at a furious pace.  Looking
round, he saw that it was a post-chaise, driven at great speed; and as
the horses were galloping, and the road was narrow, he stood leaning
against a gate until it should have passed him.

As it dashed on, Oliver caught a glimpse of a man in a white nightcap,
whose face seemed familiar to him, although his view was so brief that
he could not identify the person.  In another second or two, the
nightcap was thrust out of the chaise-window, and a stentorian voice
bellowed to the driver to stop:  which he did, as soon as he could pull
up his horses.  Then, the nightcap once again appeared: and the same
voice called Oliver by his name.

'Here!' cried the voice.  'Oliver, what's the news?  Miss Rose! Master
O-li-ver!'

'Is it you, Giles?' cried Oliver, running up to the chaise-door.

Giles popped out his nightcap again, preparatory to making some reply,
when he was suddenly pulled back by a young gentleman who occupied the
other corner of the chaise, and who eagerly demanded what was the news.

'In a word!' cried the gentleman, 'Better or worse?'

'Better--much better!' replied Oliver, hastily.

'Thank Heaven!' exclaimed the gentleman.  'You are sure?'

'Quite, sir,' replied Oliver.  'The change took place only a few hours
ago; and Mr. Losberne says, that all danger is at an end.'

The gentleman said not another word, but, opening the chaise-door,
leaped out, and taking Oliver hurriedly by the arm, led him aside.

'You are quite certain?  There is no possibility of any mistake on your
part, my boy, is there?' demanded the gentleman in a tremulous voice.
'Do not deceive me, by awakening hopes that are not to be fulfilled.'

'I would not for the world, sir,' replied Oliver.  'Indeed you may
believe me.  Mr. Losberne's words were, that she would live to bless us
all for many years to come.  I heard him say so.'

The tears stood in Oliver's eyes as he recalled the scene which was the
beginning of so much happiness; and the gentleman turned his face away,
and remained silent, for some minutes.  Oliver thought he heard him
sob, more than once; but he feared to interrupt him by any fresh
remark--for he could well guess what his feelings were--and so stood
apart, feigning to be occupied with his nosegay.

All this time, Mr. Giles, with the white nightcap on, had been sitting
on the steps of the chaise, supporting an elbow on each knee, and
wiping his eyes with a blue cotton pocket-handkerchief dotted with
white spots.  That the honest fellow had not been feigning emotion, was
abundantly demonstrated by the very red eyes with which he regarded the
young gentleman, when he turned round and addressed him.

'I think you had better go on to my mother's in the chaise, Giles,'
said he.  'I would rather walk slowly on, so as to gain a little time
before I see her.  You can say I am coming.'

'I beg your pardon, Mr. Harry,' said Giles:  giving a final polish to
his ruffled countenance with the handkerchief; 'but if you would leave
the postboy to say that, I should be very much obliged to you.  It
wouldn't be proper for the maids to see me in this state, sir; I should
never have any more authority with them if they did.'

'Well,' rejoined Harry Maylie, smiling, 'you can do as you like. Let
him go on with the luggage, if you wish it, and do you follow with us.
Only first exchange that nightcap for some more appropriate covering,
or we shall be taken for madmen.'

Mr. Giles, reminded of his unbecoming costume, snatched off and
pocketed his nightcap; and substituted a hat, of grave and sober shape,
which he took out of the chaise.  This done, the postboy drove off;
Giles, Mr. Maylie, and Oliver, followed at their leisure.

As they walked along, Oliver glanced from time to time with much
interest and curiosity at the new comer.  He seemed about
five-and-twenty years of age, and was of the middle height; his
countenance was frank and handsome; and his demeanor easy and
prepossessing.  Notwithstanding the difference between youth and age,
he bore so strong a likeness to the old lady, that Oliver would have
had no great difficulty in imagining their relationship, if he had not
already spoken of her as his mother.

Mrs. Maylie was anxiously waiting to receive her son when he reached
the cottage.  The meeting did not take place without great emotion on
both sides.

'Mother!' whispered the young man; 'why did you not write before?'

'I did,' replied Mrs. Maylie; 'but, on reflection, I determined to keep
back the letter until I had heard Mr. Losberne's opinion.'

'But why,' said the young man, 'why run the chance of that occurring
which so nearly happened?  If Rose had--I cannot utter that word
now--if this illness had terminated differently, how could you ever
have forgiven yourself!  How could I ever have know happiness again!'

'If that _had_ been the case, Harry,' said Mrs. Maylie, 'I fear your
happiness would have been effectually blighted, and that your arrival
here, a day sooner or a day later, would have been of very, very little
import.'

'And who can wonder if it be so, mother?' rejoined the young man; 'or
why should I say, _if_?--It is--it is--you know it, mother--you must
know it!'

'I know that she deserves the best and purest love the heart of man can
offer,' said Mrs. Maylie; 'I know that the devotion and affection of
her nature require no ordinary return, but one that shall be deep and
lasting.  If I did not feel this, and know, besides, that a changed
behaviour in one she loved would break her heart, I should not feel my
task so difficult of performance, or have to encounter so many
struggles in my own bosom, when I take what seems to me to be the
strict line of duty.'

'This is unkind, mother,' said Harry.  'Do you still suppose that I am
a boy ignorant of my own mind, and mistaking the impulses of my own
soul?'

'I think, my dear son,' returned Mrs. Maylie, laying her hand upon his
shoulder, 'that youth has many generous impulses which do not last; and
that among them are some, which, being gratified, become only the more
fleeting.  Above all, I think' said the lady, fixing her eyes on her
son's face, 'that if an enthusiastic, ardent, and ambitious man marry a
wife on whose name there is a stain, which, though it originate in no
fault of hers, may be visited by cold and sordid people upon her, and
upon his children also: and, in exact proportion to his success in the
world, be cast in his teeth, and made the subject of sneers against
him:  he may, no matter how generous and good his nature, one day
repent of the connection he formed in early life.  And she may have the
pain of knowing that he does so.'

'Mother,' said the young man, impatiently, 'he would be a selfish
brute, unworthy alike of the name of man and of the woman you describe,
who acted thus.'

'You think so now, Harry,' replied his mother.

'And ever will!' said the young man.  'The mental agony I have
suffered, during the last two days, wrings from me the avowal to you of
a passion which, as you well know, is not one of yesterday, nor one I
have lightly formed.  On Rose, sweet, gentle girl! my heart is set, as
firmly as ever heart of man was set on woman.  I have no thought, no
view, no hope in life, beyond her; and if you oppose me in this great
stake, you take my peace and happiness in your hands, and cast them to
the wind.  Mother, think better of this, and of me, and do not
disregard the happiness of which you seem to think so little.'

'Harry,' said Mrs. Maylie, 'it is because I think so much of warm and
sensitive hearts, that I would spare them from being wounded. But we
have said enough, and more than enough, on this matter, just now.'

'Let it rest with Rose, then,' interposed Harry.  'You will not press
these overstrained opinions of yours, so far, as to throw any obstacle
in my way?'

'I will not,' rejoined Mrs. Maylie; 'but I would have you consider--'

'I _have_ considered!' was the impatient reply; 'Mother, I have
considered, years and years.  I have considered, ever since I have been
capable of serious reflection.  My feelings remain unchanged, as they
ever will; and why should I suffer the pain of a delay in giving them
vent, which can be productive of no earthly good?  No!  Before I leave
this place, Rose shall hear me.'

'She shall,' said Mrs. Maylie.

'There is something in your manner, which would almost imply that she
will hear me coldly, mother,' said the young man.

'Not coldly,' rejoined the old lady; 'far from it.'

'How then?' urged the young man.  'She has formed no other attachment?'

'No, indeed,' replied his mother; 'you have, or I mistake, too strong a
hold on her affections already.  What I would say,' resumed the old
lady, stopping her son as he was about to speak, 'is this.  Before you
stake your all on this chance; before you suffer yourself to be carried
to the highest point of hope; reflect for a few moments, my dear child,
on Rose's history, and consider what effect the knowledge of her
doubtful birth may have on her decision:  devoted as she is to us, with
all the intensity of her noble mind, and with that perfect sacrifice of
self which, in all matters, great or trifling, has always been her
characteristic.'

'What do you mean?'

'That I leave you to discover,' replied Mrs. Maylie.  'I must go back
to her.  God bless you!'

'I shall see you again to-night?' said the young man, eagerly.

'By and by,' replied the lady; 'when I leave Rose.'

'You will tell her I am here?' said Harry.

'Of course,' replied Mrs. Maylie.

'And say how anxious I have been, and how much I have suffered, and how
I long to see her.  You will not refuse to do this, mother?'

'No,' said the old lady; 'I will tell her all.'  And pressing her son's
hand, affectionately, she hastened from the room.

Mr. Losberne and Oliver had remained at another end of the apartment
while this hurried conversation was proceeding.  The former now held
out his hand to Harry Maylie; and hearty salutations were exchanged
between them.  The doctor then communicated, in reply to multifarious
questions from his young friend, a precise account of his patient's
situation; which was quite as consolatory and full of promise, as
Oliver's statement had encouraged him to hope; and to the whole of
which, Mr. Giles, who affected to be busy about the luggage, listened
with greedy ears.

'Have you shot anything particular, lately, Giles?' inquired the
doctor, when he had concluded.

'Nothing particular, sir,' replied Mr. Giles, colouring up to the eyes.

'Nor catching any thieves, nor identifying any house-breakers?' said
the doctor.

'None at all, sir,' replied Mr. Giles, with much gravity.

'Well,' said the doctor, 'I am sorry to hear it, because you do that
sort of thing admirably.  Pray, how is Brittles?'

'The boy is very well, sir,' said Mr. Giles, recovering his usual tone
of patronage; 'and sends his respectful duty, sir.'

'That's well,' said the doctor.  'Seeing you here, reminds me, Mr.
Giles, that on the day before that on which I was called away so
hurriedly, I executed, at the request of your good mistress, a small
commission in your favour.  Just step into this corner a moment, will
you?'

Mr. Giles walked into the corner with much importance, and some wonder,
and was honoured with a short whispering conference with the doctor, on
the termination of which, he made a great many bows, and retired with
steps of unusual stateliness.  The subject matter of this conference
was not disclosed in the parlour, but the kitchen was speedily
enlightened concerning it; for Mr. Giles walked straight thither, and
having called for a mug of ale, announced, with an air of majesty,
which was highly effective, that it had pleased his mistress, in
consideration of his gallant behaviour on the occasion of that
attempted robbery, to deposit, in the local savings-bank, the sum of
five-and-twenty pounds, for his sole use and benefit.  At this, the two
women-servants lifted up their hands and eyes, and supposed that Mr.
Giles, pulling out his shirt-frill, replied, 'No, no'; and that if they
observed that he was at all haughty to his inferiors, he would thank
them to tell him so.  And then he made a great many other remarks, no
less illustrative of his humility, which were received with equal
favour and applause, and were, withal, as original and as much to the
purpose, as the remarks of great men commonly are.

Above stairs, the remainder of the evening passed cheerfully away; for
the doctor was in high spirits; and however fatigued or thoughtful
Harry Maylie might have been at first, he was not proof against the
worthy gentleman's good humour, which displayed itself in a great
variety of sallies and professional recollections, and an abundance of
small jokes, which struck Oliver as being the drollest things he had
ever heard, and caused him to laugh proportionately; to the evident
satisfaction of the doctor, who laughed immoderately at himself, and
made Harry laugh almost as heartily, by the very force of sympathy.
So, they were as pleasant a party as, under the circumstances, they
could well have been; and it was late before they retired, with light
and thankful hearts, to take that rest of which, after the doubt and
suspense they had recently undergone, they stood much in need.

Oliver rose next morning, in better heart, and went about his usual
occupations, with more hope and pleasure than he had known for many
days.  The birds were once more hung out, to sing, in their old places;
and the sweetest wild flowers that could be found, were once more
gathered to gladden Rose with their beauty. The melancholy which had
seemed to the sad eyes of the anxious boy to hang, for days past, over
every object, beautiful as all were, was dispelled by magic.  The dew
seemed to sparkle more brightly on the green leaves; the air to rustle
among them with a sweeter music; and the sky itself to look more blue
and bright. Such is the influence which the condition of our own
thoughts, exercise, even over the appearance of external objects.  Men
who look on nature, and their fellow-men, and cry that all is dark and
gloomy, are in the right; but the sombre colours are reflections from
their own jaundiced eyes and hearts.  The real hues are delicate, and
need a clearer vision.

It is worthy of remark, and Oliver did not fail to note it at the time,
that his morning expeditions were no longer made alone. Harry Maylie,
after the very first morning when he met Oliver coming laden home, was
seized with such a passion for flowers, and displayed such a taste in
their arrangement, as left his young companion far behind.  If Oliver
were behindhand in these respects, he knew where the best were to be
found; and morning after morning they scoured the country together, and
brought home the fairest that blossomed.  The window of the young
lady's chamber was opened now; for she loved to feel the rich summer
air stream in, and revive her with its freshness; but there always
stood in water, just inside the lattice, one particular little bunch,
which was made up with great care, every morning.  Oliver could not
help noticing that the withered flowers were never thrown away,
although the little vase was regularly replenished; nor, could he help
observing, that whenever the doctor came into the garden, he invariably
cast his eyes up to that particular corner, and nodded his head most
expressively, as he set forth on his morning's walk.  Pending these
observations, the days were flying by; and Rose was rapidly recovering.

Nor did Oliver's time hang heavy on his hands, although the young lady
had not yet left her chamber, and there were no evening walks, save now
and then, for a short distance, with Mrs. Maylie. He applied himself,
with redoubled assiduity, to the instructions of the white-headed old
gentleman, and laboured so hard that his quick progress surprised even
himself.  It was while he was engaged in this pursuit, that he was
greatly startled and distressed by a most unexpected occurrence.

The little room in which he was accustomed to sit, when busy at his
books, was on the ground-floor, at the back of the house.  It was quite
a cottage-room, with a lattice-window: around which were clusters of
jessamine and honeysuckle, that crept over the casement, and filled the
place with their delicious perfume.  It looked into a garden, whence a
wicket-gate opened into a small paddock; all beyond, was fine
meadow-land and wood.  There was no other dwelling near, in that
direction; and the prospect it commanded was very extensive.

One beautiful evening, when the first shades of twilight were beginning
to settle upon the earth, Oliver sat at this window, intent upon his
books.  He had been poring over them for some time; and, as the day had
been uncommonly sultry, and he had exerted himself a great deal, it is
no disparagement to the authors, whoever they may have been, to say,
that gradually and by slow degrees, he fell asleep.

There is a kind of sleep that steals upon us sometimes, which, while it
holds the body prisoner, does not free the mind from a sense of things
about it, and enable it to ramble at its pleasure.  So far as an
overpowering heaviness, a prostration of strength, and an utter
inability to control our thoughts or power of motion, can be called
sleep, this is it; and yet, we have a consciousness of all that is
going on about us, and, if we dream at such a time, words which are
really spoken, or sounds which really exist at the moment, accommodate
themselves with surprising readiness to our visions, until reality and
imagination become so strangely blended that it is afterwards almost
matter of impossibility to separate the two.  Nor is this, the most
striking phenomenon incidental to such a state.  It is an undoubted
fact, that although our senses of touch and sight be for the time dead,
yet our sleeping thoughts, and the visionary scenes that pass before
us, will be influenced and materially influenced, by the _mere silent
presence_ of some external object; which may not have been near us when
we closed our eyes:  and of whose vicinity we have had no waking
consciousness.

Oliver knew, perfectly well, that he was in his own little room; that
his books were lying on the table before him; that the sweet air was
stirring among the creeping plants outside.  And yet he was asleep.
Suddenly, the scene changed; the air became close and confined; and he
thought, with a glow of terror, that he was in the Jew's house again.
There sat the hideous old man, in his accustomed corner, pointing at
him, and whispering to another man, with his face averted, who sat
beside him.

'Hush, my dear!' he thought he heard the Jew say; 'it is he, sure
enough.  Come away.'

'He!' the other man seemed to answer; 'could I mistake him, think you?
If a crowd of ghosts were to put themselves into his exact shape, and
he stood amongst them, there is something that would tell me how to
point him out.  If you buried him fifty feet deep, and took me across
his grave, I fancy I should know, if there wasn't a mark above it, that
he lay buried there?'

The man seemed to say this, with such dreadful hatred, that Oliver
awoke with the fear, and started up.

Good Heaven!  what was that, which sent the blood tingling to his
heart, and deprived him of his voice, and of power to move!
There--there--at the window--close before him--so close, that he could
have almost touched him before he started back:  with his eyes peering
into the room, and meeting his:  there stood the Jew!  And beside him,
white with rage or fear, or both, were the scowling features of the man
who had accosted him in the inn-yard.

It was but an instant, a glance, a flash, before his eyes; and they
were gone.  But they had recognised him, and he them; and their look
was as firmly impressed upon his memory, as if it had been deeply
carved in stone, and set before him from his birth. He stood transfixed
for a moment; then, leaping from the window into the garden, called
loudly for help.



CHAPTER XXXV

CONTAINING THE UNSATISFACTORY RESULT OF OLIVER'S ADVENTURE; AND A
CONVERSATION OF SOME IMPORTANCE BETWEEN HARRY MAYLIE AND ROSE

When the inmates of the house, attracted by Oliver's cries, hurried to
the spot from which they proceeded, they found him, pale and agitated,
pointing in the direction of the meadows behind the house, and scarcely
able to articulate the words, 'The Jew! the Jew!'

Mr. Giles was at a loss to comprehend what this outcry meant; but Harry
Maylie, whose perceptions were something quicker, and who had heard
Oliver's history from his mother, understood it at once.

'What direction did he take?' he asked, catching up a heavy stick which
was standing in a corner.

'That,' replied Oliver, pointing out the course the man had taken; 'I
missed them in an instant.'

'Then, they are in the ditch!' said Harry.  'Follow!  And keep as near
me, as you can.' So saying, he sprang over the hedge, and darted off
with a speed which rendered it matter of exceeding difficulty for the
others to keep near him.

Giles followed as well as he could; and Oliver followed too; and in the
course of a minute or two, Mr. Losberne, who had been out walking, and
just then returned, tumbled over the hedge after them, and picking
himself up with more agility than he could have been supposed to
possess, struck into the same course at no contemptible speed, shouting
all the while, most prodigiously, to know what was the matter.

On they all went; nor stopped they once to breathe, until the leader,
striking off into an angle of the field indicated by Oliver, began to
search, narrowly, the ditch and hedge adjoining; which afforded time
for the remainder of the party to come up; and for Oliver to
communicate to Mr. Losberne the circumstances that had led to so
vigorous a pursuit.

The search was all in vain.  There were not even the traces of recent
footsteps, to be seen.  They stood now, on the summit of a little hill,
commanding the open fields in every direction for three or four miles.
There was the village in the hollow on the left; but, in order to gain
that, after pursuing the track Oliver had pointed out, the men must
have made a circuit of open ground, which it was impossible they could
have accomplished in so short a time.  A thick wood skirted the
meadow-land in another direction; but they could not have gained that
covert for the same reason.

'It must have been a dream, Oliver,' said Harry Maylie.

'Oh no, indeed, sir,' replied Oliver, shuddering at the very
recollection of the old wretch's countenance; 'I saw him too plainly
for that.  I saw them both, as plainly as I see you now.'

'Who was the other?' inquired Harry and Mr. Losberne, together.

'The very same man I told you of, who came so suddenly upon me at the
inn,' said Oliver.  'We had our eyes fixed full upon each other; and I
could swear to him.'

'They took this way?' demanded Harry:  'are you sure?'

'As I am that the men were at the window,' replied Oliver, pointing
down, as he spoke, to the hedge which divided the cottage-garden from
the meadow.  'The tall man leaped over, just there; and the Jew,
running a few paces to the right, crept through that gap.'

The two gentlemen watched Oliver's earnest face, as he spoke, and
looking from him to each other, seemed to feel satisfied of the
accuracy of what he said.  Still, in no direction were there any
appearances of the trampling of men in hurried flight.  The grass was
long; but it was trodden down nowhere, save where their own feet had
crushed it.  The sides and brinks of the ditches were of damp clay; but
in no one place could they discern the print of men's shoes, or the
slightest mark which would indicate that any feet had pressed the
ground for hours before.

'This is strange!' said Harry.

'Strange?' echoed the doctor.  'Blathers and Duff, themselves, could
make nothing of it.'

Notwithstanding the evidently useless nature of their search, they did
not desist until the coming on of night rendered its further
prosecution hopeless; and even then, they gave it up with reluctance.
Giles was dispatched to the different ale-houses in the village,
furnished with the best description Oliver could give of the appearance
and dress of the strangers.  Of these, the Jew was, at all events,
sufficiently remarkable to be remembered, supposing he had been seen
drinking, or loitering about; but Giles returned without any
intelligence, calculated to dispel or lessen the mystery.

On the next day, fresh search was made, and the inquiries renewed; but
with no better success.  On the day following, Oliver and Mr. Maylie
repaired to the market-town, in the hope of seeing or hearing something
of the men there; but this effort was equally fruitless.  After a few
days, the affair began to be forgotten, as most affairs are, when
wonder, having no fresh food to support it, dies away of itself.

Meanwhile, Rose was rapidly recovering.  She had left her room: was
able to go out; and mixing once more with the family, carried joy into
the hearts of all.

But, although this happy change had a visible effect on the little
circle; and although cheerful voices and merry laughter were once more
heard in the cottage; there was at times, an unwonted restraint upon
some there:  even upon Rose herself: which Oliver could not fail to
remark.  Mrs. Maylie and her son were often closeted together for a
long time; and more than once Rose appeared with traces of tears upon
her face.  After Mr. Losberne had fixed a day for his departure to
Chertsey, these symptoms increased; and it became evident that
something was in progress which affected the peace of the young lady,
and of somebody else besides.

At length, one morning, when Rose was alone in the breakfast-parlour,
Harry Maylie entered; and, with some hesitation, begged permission to
speak with her for a few moments.

'A few--a very few--will suffice, Rose,' said the young man, drawing
his chair towards her.  'What I shall have to say, has already
presented itself to your mind; the most cherished hopes of my heart are
not unknown to you, though from my lips you have not heard them stated.'

Rose had been very pale from the moment of his entrance; but that might
have been the effect of her recent illness.  She merely bowed; and
bending over some plants that stood near, waited in silence for him to
proceed.

'I--I--ought to have left here, before,' said Harry.

'You should, indeed,' replied Rose.  'Forgive me for saying so, but I
wish you had.'

'I was brought here, by the most dreadful and agonising of all
apprehensions,' said the young man; 'the fear of losing the one dear
being on whom my every wish and hope are fixed.  You had been dying;
trembling between earth and heaven.  We know that when the young, the
beautiful, and good, are visited with sickness, their pure spirits
insensibly turn towards their bright home of lasting rest; we know,
Heaven help us! that the best and fairest of our kind, too often fade
in blooming.'

There were tears in the eyes of the gentle girl, as these words were
spoken; and when one fell upon the flower over which she bent, and
glistened brightly in its cup, making it more beautiful, it seemed as
though the outpouring of her fresh young heart, claimed kindred
naturally, with the loveliest things in nature.

'A creature,' continued the young man, passionately, 'a creature as
fair and innocent of guile as one of God's own angels, fluttered
between life and death.  Oh! who could hope, when the distant world to
which she was akin, half opened to her view, that she would return to
the sorrow and calamity of this!  Rose, Rose, to know that you were
passing away like some soft shadow, which a light from above, casts
upon the earth; to have no hope that you would be spared to those who
linger here; hardly to know a reason why you should be; to feel that
you belonged to that bright sphere whither so many of the fairest and
the best have winged their early flight; and yet to pray, amid all
these consolations, that you might be restored to those who loved
you--these were distractions almost too great to bear. They were mine,
by day and night; and with them, came such a rushing torrent of fears,
and apprehensions, and selfish regrets, lest you should die, and never
know how devotedly I loved you, as almost bore down sense and reason in
its course.  You recovered. Day by day, and almost hour by hour, some
drop of health came back, and mingling with the spent and feeble stream
of life which circulated languidly within you, swelled it again to a
high and rushing tide.  I have watched you change almost from death, to
life, with eyes that turned blind with their eagerness and deep
affection. Do not tell me that you wish I had lost this; for it has
softened my heart to all mankind.'

'I did not mean that,' said Rose, weeping; 'I only wish you had left
here, that you might have turned to high and noble pursuits again; to
pursuits well worthy of you.'

'There is no pursuit more worthy of me:  more worthy of the highest
nature that exists:  than the struggle to win such a heart as yours,'
said the young man, taking her hand. 'Rose, my own dear Rose!  For
years--for years--I have loved you; hoping to win my way to fame, and
then come proudly home and tell you it had been pursued only for you to
share; thinking, in my daydreams, how I would remind you, in that happy
moment, of the many silent tokens I had given of a boy's attachment,
and claim your hand, as in redemption of some old mute contract that
had been sealed between us!  That time has not arrived; but here, with
not fame won, and no young vision realised, I offer you the heart so
long your own, and stake my all upon the words with which you greet the
offer.'

'Your behaviour has ever been kind and noble.' said Rose, mastering the
emotions by which she was agitated.  'As you believe that I am not
insensible or ungrateful, so hear my answer.'

'It is, that I may endeavour to deserve you; it is, dear Rose?'

'It is,' replied Rose, 'that you must endeavour to forget me; not as
your old and dearly-attached companion, for that would wound me deeply;
but, as the object of your love.  Look into the world; think how many
hearts you would be proud to gain, are there. Confide some other
passion to me, if you will; I will be the truest, warmest, and most
faithful friend you have.'

There was a pause, during which, Rose, who had covered her face with
one hand, gave free vent to her tears.  Harry still retained the other.

'And your reasons, Rose,' he said, at length, in a low voice; 'your
reasons for this decision?'

'You have a right to know them,' rejoined Rose.  'You can say nothing
to alter my resolution.  It is a duty that I must perform.  I owe it,
alike to others, and to myself.'

'To yourself?'

'Yes, Harry.  I owe it to myself, that I, a friendless, portionless,
girl, with a blight upon my name, should not give your friends reason
to suspect that I had sordidly yielded to your first passion, and
fastened myself, a clog, on all your hopes and projects.  I owe it to
you and yours, to prevent you from opposing, in the warmth of your
generous nature, this great obstacle to your progress in the world.'

'If your inclinations chime with your sense of duty--' Harry began.

'They do not,' replied Rose, colouring deeply.

'Then you return my love?' said Harry.  'Say but that, dear Rose; say
but that; and soften the bitterness of this hard disappointment!'

'If I could have done so, without doing heavy wrong to him I loved,'
rejoined Rose, 'I could have--'

'Have received this declaration very differently?' said Harry. 'Do not
conceal that from me, at least, Rose.'

'I could,' said Rose.  'Stay!' she added, disengaging her hand, 'why
should we prolong this painful interview?  Most painful to me, and yet
productive of lasting happiness, notwithstanding; for it _will_ be
happiness to know that I once held the high place in your regard which
I now occupy, and every triumph you achieve in life will animate me
with new fortitude and firmness.  Farewell, Harry!  As we have met
to-day, we meet no more; but in other relations than those in which
this conversation have placed us, we may be long and happily entwined;
and may every blessing that the prayers of a true and earnest heart can
call down from the source of all truth and sincerity, cheer and prosper
you!'

'Another word, Rose,' said Harry.  'Your reason in your own words.
From your own lips, let me hear it!'

'The prospect before you,' answered Rose, firmly, 'is a brilliant one.
All the honours to which great talents and powerful connections can
help men in public life, are in store for you. But those connections
are proud; and I will neither mingle with such as may hold in scorn the
mother who gave me life; nor bring disgrace or failure on the son of
her who has so well supplied that mother's place.  In a word,' said the
young lady, turning away, as her temporary firmness forsook her, 'there
is a stain upon my name, which the world visits on innocent heads.  I
will carry it into no blood but my own; and the reproach shall rest
alone on me.'

'One word more, Rose.  Dearest Rose! one more!' cried Harry, throwing
himself before her.  'If I had been less--less fortunate, the world
would call it--if some obscure and peaceful life had been my
destiny--if I had been poor, sick, helpless--would you have turned from
me then?  Or has my probable advancement to riches and honour, given
this scruple birth?'

'Do not press me to reply,' answered Rose.  'The question does not
arise, and never will.  It is unfair, almost unkind, to urge it.'

'If your answer be what I almost dare to hope it is,' retorted Harry,
'it will shed a gleam of happiness upon my lonely way, and light the
path before me.  It is not an idle thing to do so much, by the
utterance of a few brief words, for one who loves you beyond all else.
Oh, Rose: in the name of my ardent and enduring attachment; in the name
of all I have suffered for you, and all you doom me to undergo; answer
me this one question!'

'Then, if your lot had been differently cast,' rejoined Rose; 'if you
had been even a little, but not so far, above me; if I could have been
a help and comfort to you in any humble scene of peace and retirement,
and not a blot and drawback in ambitious and distinguished crowds; I
should have been spared this trial.  I have every reason to be happy,
very happy, now; but then, Harry, I own I should have been happier.'

Busy recollections of old hopes, cherished as a girl, long ago, crowded
into the mind of Rose, while making this avowal; but they brought tears
with them, as old hopes will when they come back withered; and they
relieved her.

'I cannot help this weakness, and it makes my purpose stronger,' said
Rose, extending her hand.  'I must leave you now, indeed.'

'I ask one promise,' said Harry.  'Once, and only once more,--say
within a year, but it may be much sooner,--I may speak to you again on
this subject, for the last time.'

'Not to press me to alter my right determination,' replied Rose, with a
melancholy smile; 'it will be useless.'

'No,' said Harry; 'to hear you repeat it, if you will--finally repeat
it!  I will lay at your feet, whatever of station of fortune I may
possess; and if you still adhere to your present resolution, will not
seek, by word or act, to change it.'

'Then let it be so,' rejoined Rose; 'it is but one pang the more, and
by that time I may be enabled to bear it better.'

She extended her hand again.  But the young man caught her to his
bosom; and imprinting one kiss on her beautiful forehead, hurried from
the room.



CHAPTER XXXVI

IS A VERY SHORT ONE, AND MAY APPEAR OF NO GREAT IMPORTANCE IN ITS
PLACE, BUT IT SHOULD BE READ NOTWITHSTANDING, AS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST,
AND A KEY TO ONE THAT WILL FOLLOW WHEN ITS TIME ARRIVES

'And so you are resolved to be my travelling companion this morning;
eh?' said the doctor, as Harry Maylie joined him and Oliver at the
breakfast-table.  'Why, you are not in the same mind or intention two
half-hours together!'

'You will tell me a different tale one of these days,' said Harry,
colouring without any perceptible reason.

'I hope I may have good cause to do so,' replied Mr. Losberne; 'though
I confess I don't think I shall.  But yesterday morning you had made up
your mind, in a great hurry, to stay here, and to accompany your
mother, like a dutiful son, to the sea-side. Before noon, you announce
that you are going to do me the honour of accompanying me as far as I
go, on your road to London.  And at night, you urge me, with great
mystery, to start before the ladies are stirring; the consequence of
which is, that young Oliver here is pinned down to his breakfast when
he ought to be ranging the meadows after botanical phenomena of all
kinds. Too bad, isn't it, Oliver?'

'I should have been very sorry not to have been at home when you and
Mr. Maylie went away, sir,' rejoined Oliver.

'That's a fine fellow,' said the doctor; 'you shall come and see me
when you return.  But, to speak seriously, Harry; has any communication
from the great nobs produced this sudden anxiety on your part to be
gone?'

'The great nobs,' replied Harry, 'under which designation, I presume,
you include my most stately uncle, have not communicated with me at
all, since I have been here; nor, at this time of the year, is it
likely that anything would occur to render necessary my immediate
attendance among them.'

'Well,' said the doctor, 'you are a queer fellow.  But of course they
will get you into parliament at the election before Christmas, and
these sudden shiftings and changes are no bad preparation for political
life.  There's something in that.  Good training is always desirable,
whether the race be for place, cup, or sweepstakes.'

Harry Maylie looked as if he could have followed up this short dialogue
by one or two remarks that would have staggered the doctor not a
little; but he contented himself with saying, 'We shall see,' and
pursued the subject no farther.  The post-chaise drove up to the door
shortly afterwards; and Giles coming in for the luggage, the good
doctor bustled out, to see it packed.

'Oliver,' said Harry Maylie, in a low voice, 'let me speak a word with
you.'

Oliver walked into the window-recess to which Mr. Maylie beckoned him;
much surprised at the mixture of sadness and boisterous spirits, which
his whole behaviour displayed.

'You can write well now?' said Harry, laying his hand upon his arm.

'I hope so, sir,' replied Oliver.

'I shall not be at home again, perhaps for some time; I wish you would
write to me--say once a fort-night:  every alternate Monday: to the
General Post Office in London.  Will you?'

'Oh! certainly, sir; I shall be proud to do it,' exclaimed Oliver,
greatly delighted with the commission.

'I should like to know how--how my mother and Miss Maylie are,' said
the young man; 'and you can fill up a sheet by telling me what walks
you take, and what you talk about, and whether she--they, I mean--seem
happy and quite well. You understand me?'

'Oh! quite, sir, quite,' replied Oliver.

'I would rather you did not mention it to them,' said Harry, hurrying
over his words; 'because it might make my mother anxious to write to me
oftener, and it is a trouble and worry to her. Let it be a secret
between you and me; and mind you tell me everything!  I depend upon
you.'

Oliver, quite elated and honoured by a sense of his importance,
faithfully promised to be secret and explicit in his communications.
Mr. Maylie took leave of him, with many assurances of his regard and
protection.

The doctor was in the chaise; Giles (who, it had been arranged, should
be left behind) held the door open in his hand; and the women-servants
were in the garden, looking on.  Harry cast one slight glance at the
latticed window, and jumped into the carriage.

'Drive on!' he cried, 'hard, fast, full gallop!  Nothing short of
flying will keep pace with me, to-day.'

'Halloa!' cried the doctor, letting down the front glass in a great
hurry, and shouting to the postillion; 'something very short of flying
will keep pace with _me_.  Do you hear?'

Jingling and clattering, till distance rendered its noise inaudible,
and its rapid progress only perceptible to the eye, the vehicle wound
its way along the road, almost hidden in a cloud of dust: now wholly
disappearing, and now becoming visible again, as intervening objects,
or the intricacies of the way, permitted.  It was not until even the
dusty cloud was no longer to be seen, that the gazers dispersed.

And there was one looker-on, who remained with eyes fixed upon the spot
where the carriage had disappeared, long after it was many miles away;
for, behind the white curtain which had shrouded her from view when
Harry raised his eyes towards the window, sat Rose herself.

'He seems in high spirits and happy,' she said, at length. 'I feared
for a time he might be otherwise.  I was mistaken.  I am very, very
glad.'

Tears are signs of gladness as well as grief; but those which coursed
down Rose's face, as she sat pensively at the window, still gazing in
the same direction, seemed to tell more of sorrow than of joy.



CHAPTER XXXVII

IN WHICH THE READER MAY PERCEIVE A CONTRAST, NOT UNCOMMON IN
MATRIMONIAL CASES

Mr. Bumble sat in the workhouse parlour, with his eyes moodily fixed on
the cheerless grate, whence, as it was summer time, no brighter gleam
proceeded, than the reflection of certain sickly rays of the sun, which
were sent back from its cold and shining surface.  A paper fly-cage
dangled from the ceiling, to which he occasionally raised his eyes in
gloomy thought; and, as the heedless insects hovered round the gaudy
net-work, Mr. Bumble would heave a deep sigh, while a more gloomy
shadow overspread his countenance.  Mr. Bumble was meditating; it might
be that the insects brought to mind, some painful passage in his own
past life.

Nor was Mr. Bumble's gloom the only thing calculated to awaken a
pleasing melancholy in the bosom of a spectator. There were not wanting
other appearances, and those closely connected with his own person,
which announced that a great change had taken place in the position of
his affairs.  The laced coat, and the cocked hat; where were they?  He
still wore knee-breeches, and dark cotton stockings on his nether
limbs; but they were not _the_ breeches.  The coat was wide-skirted;
and in that respect like _the_ coat, but, oh how different!  The mighty
cocked hat was replaced by a modest round one.  Mr. Bumble was no
longer a beadle.

There are some promotions in life, which, independent of the more
substantial rewards they offer, require peculiar value and dignity from
the coats and waistcoats connected with them.  A field-marshal has his
uniform; a bishop his silk apron; a counsellor his silk gown; a beadle
his cocked hat.  Strip the bishop of his apron, or the beadle of his
hat and lace; what are they?  Men.  Mere men.  Dignity, and even
holiness too, sometimes, are more questions of coat and waistcoat than
some people imagine.

Mr. Bumble had married Mrs. Corney, and was master of the workhouse.
Another beadle had come into power.  On him the cocked hat, gold-laced
coat, and staff, had all three descended.

'And to-morrow two months it was done!' said Mr. Bumble, with a sigh.
'It seems a age.'

Mr. Bumble might have meant that he had concentrated a whole existence
of happiness into the short space of eight weeks; but the sigh--there
was a vast deal of meaning in the sigh.

'I sold myself,' said Mr. Bumble, pursuing the same train of relection,
'for six teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a milk-pot; with a small
quantity of second-hand furniture, and twenty pound in money.  I went
very reasonable.  Cheap, dirt cheap!'

'Cheap!' cried a shrill voice in Mr. Bumble's ear: 'you would have been
dear at any price; and dear enough I paid for you, Lord above knows
that!'

Mr. Bumble turned, and encountered the face of his interesting consort,
who, imperfectly comprehending the few words she had overheard of his
complaint, had hazarded the foregoing remark at a venture.

'Mrs. Bumble, ma'am!' said Mr. Bumble, with a sentimental sternness.

'Well!' cried the lady.

'Have the goodness to look at me,' said Mr. Bumble, fixing his eyes
upon her.  (If she stands such a eye as that,' said Mr. Bumble to
himself, 'she can stand anything.  It is a eye I never knew to fail
with paupers.  If it fails with her, my power is gone.')

Whether an exceedingly small expansion of eye be sufficient to quell
paupers, who, being lightly fed, are in no very high condition; or
whether the late Mrs. Corney was particularly proof against eagle
glances; are matters of opinion.  The matter of fact, is, that the
matron was in no way overpowered by Mr. Bumble's scowl, but, on the
contrary, treated it with great disdain, and even raised a laugh
thereat, which sounded as though it were genuine.

On hearing this most unexpected sound, Mr. Bumble looked, first
incredulous, and afterwards amazed.  He then relapsed into his former
state; nor did he rouse himself until his attention was again awakened
by the voice of his partner.

'Are you going to sit snoring there, all day?' inquired Mrs. Bumble.

'I am going to sit here, as long as I think proper, ma'am,' rejoined
Mr. Bumble; 'and although I was _not_ snoring, I shall snore, gape,
sneeze, laugh, or cry, as the humour strikes me; such being my
prerogative.'

'_Your_ prerogative!' sneered Mrs. Bumble, with ineffable contempt.

'I said the word, ma'am,' said Mr. Bumble.  'The prerogative of a man
is to command.'

'And what's the prerogative of a woman, in the name of Goodness?' cried
the relict of Mr. Corney deceased.

'To obey, ma'am,' thundered Mr. Bumble.  'Your late unfortunate husband
should have taught it you; and then, perhaps, he might have been alive
now.  I wish he was, poor man!'

Mrs. Bumble, seeing at a glance, that the decisive moment had now
arrived, and that a blow struck for the mastership on one side or
other, must necessarily be final and conclusive, no sooner heard this
allusion to the dead and gone, than she dropped into a chair, and with
a loud scream that Mr. Bumble was a hard-hearted brute, fell into a
paroxysm of tears.

But, tears were not the things to find their way to Mr. Bumble's soul;
his heart was waterproof.  Like washable beaver hats that improve with
rain, his nerves were rendered stouter and more vigorous, by showers of
tears, which, being tokens of weakness, and so far tacit admissions of
his own power, pleased and exalted him.  He eyed his good lady with
looks of great satisfaction, and begged, in an encouraging manner, that
she should cry her hardest:  the exercise being looked upon, by the
faculty, as strongly conducive to health.

'It opens the lungs, washes the countenance, exercises the eyes, and
softens down the temper,' said Mr. Bumble.  'So cry away.'

As he discharged himself of this pleasantry, Mr. Bumble took his hat
from a peg, and putting it on, rather rakishly, on one side, as a man
might, who felt he had asserted his superiority in a becoming manner,
thrust his hands into his pockets, and sauntered towards the door, with
much ease and waggishness depicted in his whole appearance.

Now, Mrs. Corney that was, had tried the tears, because they were less
troublesome than a manual assault; but, she was quite prepared to make
trial of the latter mode of proceeding, as Mr. Bumble was not long in
discovering.

The first proof he experienced of the fact, was conveyed in a hollow
sound, immediately succeeded by the sudden flying off of his hat to the
opposite end of the room.  This preliminary proceeding laying bare his
head, the expert lady, clasping him tightly round the throat with one
hand, inflicted a shower of blows (dealt with singular vigour and
dexterity) upon it with the other.  This done, she created a little
variety by scratching his face, and tearing his hair; and, having, by
this time, inflicted as much punishment as she deemed necessary for the
offence, she pushed him over a chair, which was luckily well situated
for the purpose:  and defied him to talk about his prerogative again,
if he dared.

'Get up!' said Mrs. Bumble, in a voice of command.  'And take yourself
away from here, unless you want me to do something desperate.'

Mr. Bumble rose with a very rueful countenance:  wondering much what
something desperate might be.  Picking up his hat, he looked towards
the door.

'Are you going?' demanded Mrs. Bumble.

'Certainly, my dear, certainly,' rejoined Mr. Bumble, making a quicker
motion towards the door.  'I didn't intend to--I'm going, my dear!  You
are so very violent, that really I--'

At this instant, Mrs. Bumble stepped hastily forward to replace the
carpet, which had been kicked up in the scuffle.  Mr. Bumble
immediately darted out of the room, without bestowing another thought
on his unfinished sentence:  leaving the late Mrs. Corney in full
possession of the field.

Mr. Bumble was fairly taken by surprise, and fairly beaten.  He had a
decided propensity for bullying:  derived no inconsiderable pleasure
from the exercise of petty cruelty; and, consequently, was (it is
needless to say) a coward.  This is by no means a disparagement to his
character; for many official personages, who are held in high respect
and admiration, are the victims of similar infirmities.  The remark is
made, indeed, rather in his favour than otherwise, and with a view of
impressing the reader with a just sense of his qualifications for
office.

But, the measure of his degradation was not yet full.  After making a
tour of the house, and thinking, for the first time, that the poor-laws
really were too hard on people; and that men who ran away from their
wives, leaving them chargeable to the parish, ought, in justice to be
visited with no punishment at all, but rather rewarded as meritorious
individuals who had suffered much; Mr. Bumble came to a room where some
of the female paupers were usually employed in washing the parish
linen:  when the sound of voices in conversation, now proceeded.

'Hem!' said Mr. Bumble, summoning up all his native dignity. 'These
women at least shall continue to respect the prerogative. Hallo! hallo
there!  What do you mean by this noise, you hussies?'

With these words, Mr. Bumble opened the door, and walked in with a very
fierce and angry manner:  which was at once exchanged for a most
humiliated and cowering air, as his eyes unexpectedly rested on the
form of his lady wife.

'My dear,' said Mr. Bumble, 'I didn't know you were here.'

'Didn't know I was here!' repeated Mrs. Bumble.  'What do _you_ do
here?'

'I thought they were talking rather too much to be doing their work
properly, my dear,' replied Mr. Bumble:  glancing distractedly at a
couple of old women at the wash-tub, who were comparing notes of
admiration at the workhouse-master's humility.

'_You_ thought they were talking too much?' said Mrs. Bumble. 'What
business is it of yours?'

'Why, my dear--' urged Mr. Bumble submissively.

'What business is it of yours?' demanded Mrs. Bumble, again.

'It's very true, you're matron here, my dear,' submitted Mr. Bumble;
'but I thought you mightn't be in the way just then.'

'I'll tell you what, Mr. Bumble,' returned his lady.  'We don't want
any of your interference.  You're a great deal too fond of poking your
nose into things that don't concern you, making everybody in the house
laugh, the moment your back is turned, and making yourself look like a
fool every hour in the day.  Be off; come!'

Mr. Bumble, seeing with excruciating feelings, the delight of the two
old paupers, who were tittering together most rapturously, hesitated
for an instant.  Mrs. Bumble, whose patience brooked no delay, caught
up a bowl of soap-suds, and motioning him towards the door, ordered him
instantly to depart, on pain of receiving the contents upon his portly
person.

What could Mr. Bumble do?  He looked dejectedly round, and slunk away;
and, as he reached the door, the titterings of the paupers broke into a
shrill chuckle of irrepressible delight.  It wanted but this.  He was
degraded in their eyes; he had lost caste and station before the very
paupers; he had fallen from all the height and pomp of beadleship, to
the lowest depth of the most snubbed hen-peckery.

'All in two months!' said Mr. Bumble, filled with dismal thoughts.
'Two months!  No more than two months ago, I was not only my own
master, but everybody else's, so far as the porochial workhouse was
concerned, and now!--'

It was too much.  Mr. Bumble boxed the ears of the boy who opened the
gate for him (for he had reached the portal in his reverie); and
walked, distractedly, into the street.

He walked up one street, and down another, until exercise had abated
the first passion of his grief; and then the revulsion of feeling made
him thirsty.  He passed a great many public-houses; but, at length
paused before one in a by-way, whose parlour, as he gathered from a
hasty peep over the blinds, was deserted, save by one solitary
customer.  It began to rain, heavily, at the moment.  This determined
him.  Mr. Bumble stepped in; and ordering something to drink, as he
passed the bar, entered the apartment into which he had looked from the
street.

The man who was seated there, was tall and dark, and wore a large
cloak.  He had the air of a stranger; and seemed, by a certain
haggardness in his look, as well as by the dusty soils on his dress, to
have travelled some distance.  He eyed Bumble askance, as he entered,
but scarcely deigned to nod his head in acknowledgment of his
salutation.

Mr. Bumble had quite dignity enough for two; supposing even that the
stranger had been more familiar:  so he drank his gin-and-water in
silence, and read the paper with great show of pomp and circumstance.

It so happened, however: as it will happen very often, when men fall
into company under such circumstances:  that Mr. Bumble felt, every now
and then, a powerful inducement, which he could not resist, to steal a
look at the stranger:  and that whenever he did so, he withdrew his
eyes, in some confusion, to find that the stranger was at that moment
stealing a look at him.  Mr. Bumble's awkwardness was enhanced by the
very remarkable expression of the stranger's eye, which was keen and
bright, but shadowed by a scowl of distrust and suspicion, unlike
anything he had ever observed before, and repulsive to behold.

When they had encountered each other's glance several times in this
way, the stranger, in a harsh, deep voice, broke silence.

'Were you looking for me,' he said, 'when you peered in at the window?'

'Not that I am aware of, unless you're Mr.--'  Here Mr. Bumble stopped
short; for he was curious to know the stranger's name, and thought in
his impatience, he might supply the blank.

'I see you were not,' said the stranger; an expression of quiet sarcasm
playing about his mouth; 'or you have known my name.  You don't know
it.  I would recommend you not to ask for it.'

'I meant no harm, young man,' observed Mr. Bumble, majestically.

'And have done none,' said the stranger.

Another silence succeeded this short dialogue:  which was again broken
by the stranger.

'I have seen you before, I think?' said he.  'You were differently
dressed at that time, and I only passed you in the street, but I should
know you again.  You were beadle here, once; were you not?'

'I was,' said Mr. Bumble, in some surprise; 'porochial beadle.'

'Just so,' rejoined the other, nodding his head.  'It was in that
character I saw you.  What are you now?'

'Master of the workhouse,' rejoined Mr. Bumble, slowly and
impressively, to check any undue familiarity the stranger might
otherwise assume.  'Master of the workhouse, young man!'

'You have the same eye to your own interest, that you always had, I
doubt not?' resumed the stranger, looking keenly into Mr. Bumble's
eyes, as he raised them in astonishment at the question.

'Don't scruple to answer freely, man.  I know you pretty well, you see.'

'I suppose, a married man,' replied Mr. Bumble, shading his eyes with
his hand, and surveying the stranger, from head to foot, in evident
perplexity, 'is not more averse to turning an honest penny when he can,
than a single one.  Porochial officers are not so well paid that they
can afford to refuse any little extra fee, when it comes to them in a
civil and proper manner.'

The stranger smiled, and nodded his head again: as much to say, he had
not mistaken his man; then rang the bell.

'Fill this glass again,' he said, handing Mr. Bumble's empty tumbler to
the landlord.  'Let it be strong and hot.  You like it so, I suppose?'

'Not too strong,' replied Mr. Bumble, with a delicate cough.

'You understand what that means, landlord!' said the stranger, drily.

The host smiled, disappeared, and shortly afterwards returned with a
steaming jorum: of which, the first gulp brought the water into Mr.
Bumble's eyes.

'Now listen to me,' said the stranger, after closing the door and
window.  'I came down to this place, to-day, to find you out; and, by
one of those chances which the devil throws in the way of his friends
sometimes, you walked into the very room I was sitting in, while you
were uppermost in my mind.  I want some information from you.  I don't
ask you to give it for nothing, slight as it is.  Put up that, to begin
with.'

As he spoke, he pushed a couple of sovereigns across the table to his
companion, carefully, as though unwilling that the chinking of money
should be heard without.  When Mr. Bumble had scrupulously examined the
coins, to see that they were genuine, and had put them up, with much
satisfaction, in his waistcoat-pocket, he went on:

'Carry your memory back--let me see--twelve years, last winter.'

'It's a long time,' said Mr. Bumble.  'Very good.  I've done it.'

'The scene, the workhouse.'

'Good!'

'And the time, night.'

'Yes.'

'And the place, the crazy hole, wherever it was, in which miserable
drabs brought forth the life and health so often denied to
themselves--gave birth to puling children for the parish to rear; and
hid their shame, rot 'em in the grave!'

'The lying-in room, I suppose?' said Mr. Bumble, not quite following
the stranger's excited description.

'Yes,' said the stranger.  'A boy was born there.'

'A many boys,' observed Mr. Bumble, shaking his head, despondingly.

'A murrain on the young devils!' cried the stranger; 'I speak of one; a
meek-looking, pale-faced boy, who was apprenticed down here, to a
coffin-maker--I wish he had made his coffin, and screwed his body in
it--and who afterwards ran away to London, as it was supposed.

'Why, you mean Oliver!  Young Twist!' said Mr. Bumble; 'I remember him,
of course.  There wasn't a obstinater young rascal--'

'It's not of him I want to hear; I've heard enough of him,' said the
stranger, stopping Mr. Bumble in the outset of a tirade on the subject
of poor Oliver's vices.  'It's of a woman; the hag that nursed his
mother.  Where is she?'

'Where is she?' said Mr. Bumble, whom the gin-and-water had rendered
facetious.  'It would be hard to tell.  There's no midwifery there,
whichever place she's gone to; so I suppose she's out of employment,
anyway.'

'What do you mean?' demanded the stranger, sternly.

'That she died last winter,' rejoined Mr. Bumble.

The man looked fixedly at him when he had given this information, and
although he did not withdraw his eyes for some time afterwards, his
gaze gradually became vacant and abstracted, and he seemed lost in
thought.  For some time, he appeared doubtful whether he ought to be
relieved or disappointed by the intelligence; but at length he breathed
more freely; and withdrawing his eyes, observed that it was no great
matter. With that he rose, as if to depart.

But Mr. Bumble was cunning enough; and he at once saw that an
opportunity was opened, for the lucrative disposal of some secret in
the possession of his better half.  He well remembered the night of old
Sally's death, which the occurrences of that day had given him good
reason to recollect, as the occasion on which he had proposed to Mrs.
Corney; and although that lady had never confided to him the disclosure
of which she had been the solitary witness, he had heard enough to know
that it related to something that had occurred in the old woman's
attendance, as workhouse nurse, upon the young mother of Oliver Twist.
Hastily calling this circumstance to mind, he informed the stranger,
with an air of mystery, that one woman had been closeted with the old
harridan shortly before she died; and that she could, as he had reason
to believe, throw some light on the subject of his inquiry.

'How can I find her?' said the stranger, thrown off his guard; and
plainly showing that all his fears (whatever they were) were aroused
afresh by the intelligence.

'Only through me,' rejoined Mr. Bumble.

'When?' cried the stranger, hastily.

'To-morrow,' rejoined Bumble.

'At nine in the evening,' said the stranger, producing a scrap of
paper, and writing down upon it, an obscure address by the water-side,
in characters that betrayed his agitation; 'at nine in the evening,
bring her to me there.  I needn't tell you to be secret.  It's your
interest.'

With these words, he led the way to the door, after stopping to pay for
the liquor that had been drunk.  Shortly remarking that their roads
were different, he departed, without more ceremony than an emphatic
repetition of the hour of appointment for the following night.

On glancing at the address, the parochial functionary observed that it
contained no name.  The stranger had not gone far, so he made after him
to ask it.

'What do you want?' cried the man, turning quickly round, as Bumble
touched him on the arm.  'Following me?'

'Only to ask a question,' said the other, pointing to the scrap of
paper.  'What name am I to ask for?'

'Monks!' rejoined the man; and strode hastily, away.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT PASSED BETWEEN MR. AND MRS. BUMBLE, AND
MR. MONKS, AT THEIR NOCTURNAL INTERVIEW

It was a dull, close, overcast summer evening.  The clouds, which had
been threatening all day, spread out in a dense and sluggish mass of
vapour, already yielded large drops of rain, and seemed to presage a
violent thunder-storm, when Mr. and Mrs. Bumble, turning out of the
main street of the town, directed their course towards a scattered
little colony of ruinous houses, distant from it some mile and a-half,
or thereabouts, and erected on a low unwholesome swamp, bordering upon
the river.

They were both wrapped in old and shabby outer garments, which might,
perhaps, serve the double purpose of protecting their persons from the
rain, and sheltering them from observation.  The husband carried a
lantern, from which, however, no light yet shone; and trudged on, a few
paces in front, as though--the way being dirty--to give his wife the
benefit of treading in his heavy footprints.  They went on, in profound
silence; every now and then, Mr. Bumble relaxed his pace, and turned
his head as if to make sure that his helpmate was following; then,
discovering that she was close at his heels, he mended his rate of
walking, and proceeded, at a considerable increase of speed, towards
their place of destination.

This was far from being a place of doubtful character; for it had long
been known as the residence of none but low ruffians, who, under
various pretences of living by their labour, subsisted chiefly on
plunder and crime.  It was a collection of mere hovels:  some, hastily
built with loose bricks: others, of old worm-eaten ship-timber: jumbled
together without any attempt at order or arrangement, and planted, for
the most part, within a few feet of the river's bank.  A few leaky
boats drawn up on the mud, and made fast to the dwarf wall which
skirted it:  and here and there an oar or coil of rope:  appeared, at
first, to indicate that the inhabitants of these miserable cottages
pursued some avocation on the river; but a glance at the shattered and
useless condition of the articles thus displayed, would have led a
passer-by, without much difficulty, to the conjecture that they were
disposed there, rather for the preservation of appearances, than with
any view to their being actually employed.

In the heart of this cluster of huts; and skirting the river, which its
upper stories overhung; stood a large building, formerly used as a
manufactory of some kind.  It had, in its day, probably furnished
employment to the inhabitants of the surrounding tenements.  But it had
long since gone to ruin.  The rat, the worm, and the action of the
damp, had weakened and rotted the piles on which it stood; and a
considerable portion of the building had already sunk down into the
water; while the remainder, tottering and bending over the dark stream,
seemed to wait a favourable opportunity of following its old companion,
and involving itself in the same fate.

It was before this ruinous building that the worthy couple paused, as
the first peal of distant thunder reverberated in the air, and the rain
commenced pouring violently down.

'The place should be somewhere here,' said Bumble, consulting a scrap
of paper he held in his hand.

'Halloa there!' cried a voice from above.

Following the sound, Mr. Bumble raised his head and descried a man
looking out of a door, breast-high, on the second story.

'Stand still, a minute,' cried the voice; 'I'll be with you directly.'
With which the head disappeared, and the door closed.

'Is that the man?' asked Mr. Bumble's good lady.

Mr. Bumble nodded in the affirmative.

'Then, mind what I told you,' said the matron: 'and be careful to say
as little as you can, or you'll betray us at once.'

Mr. Bumble, who had eyed the building with very rueful looks, was
apparently about to express some doubts relative to the advisability of
proceeding any further with the enterprise just then, when he was
prevented by the appearance of Monks: who opened a small door, near
which they stood, and beckoned them inwards.

'Come in!' he cried impatiently, stamping his foot upon the ground.
'Don't keep me here!'

The woman, who had hesitated at first, walked boldly in, without any
other invitation.  Mr. Bumble, who was ashamed or afraid to lag behind,
followed:  obviously very ill at ease and with scarcely any of that
remarkable dignity which was usually his chief characteristic.

'What the devil made you stand lingering there, in the wet?' said
Monks, turning round, and addressing Bumble, after he had bolted the
door behind them.

'We--we were only cooling ourselves,' stammered Bumble, looking
apprehensively about him.

'Cooling yourselves!' retorted Monks.  'Not all the rain that ever
fell, or ever will fall, will put as much of hell's fire out, as a man
can carry about with him.  You won't cool yourself so easily; don't
think it!'

With this agreeable speech, Monks turned short upon the matron, and
bent his gaze upon her, till even she, who was not easily cowed, was
fain to withdraw her eyes, and turn them towards the ground.

'This is the woman, is it?' demanded Monks.

'Hem!  That is the woman,' replied Mr. Bumble, mindful of his wife's
caution.

'You think women never can keep secrets, I suppose?' said the matron,
interposing, and returning, as she spoke, the searching look of Monks.

'I know they will always keep _one_ till it's found out,' said Monks.

'And what may that be?' asked the matron.

'The loss of their own good name,' replied Monks.  'So, by the same
rule, if a woman's a party to a secret that might hang or transport
her, I'm not afraid of her telling it to anybody; not I!  Do you
understand, mistress?'

'No,' rejoined the matron, slightly colouring as she spoke.

'Of course you don't!' said Monks.  'How should you?'

Bestowing something half-way between a smile and a frown upon his two
companions, and again beckoning them to follow him, the man hastened
across the apartment, which was of considerable extent, but low in the
roof.  He was preparing to ascend a steep staircase, or rather ladder,
leading to another floor of warehouses above:  when a bright flash of
lightning streamed down the aperture, and a peal of thunder followed,
which shook the crazy building to its centre.

'Hear it!' he cried, shrinking back.  'Hear it!  Rolling and crashing
on as if it echoed through a thousand caverns where the devils were
hiding from it.  I hate the sound!'

He remained silent for a few moments; and then, removing his hands
suddenly from his face, showed, to the unspeakable discomposure of Mr.
Bumble, that it was much distorted and discoloured.

'These fits come over me, now and then,' said Monks, observing his
alarm; 'and thunder sometimes brings them on. Don't mind me now; it's
all over for this once.'

Thus speaking, he led the way up the ladder; and hastily closing the
window-shutter of the room into which it led, lowered a lantern which
hung at the end of a rope and pulley passed through one of the heavy
beams in the ceiling:  and which cast a dim light upon an old table and
three chairs that were placed beneath it.

'Now,' said Monks, when they had all three seated themselves, 'the
sooner we come to our business, the better for all.  The woman know
what it is, does she?'

The question was addressed to Bumble; but his wife anticipated the
reply, by intimating that she was perfectly acquainted with it.

'He is right in saying that you were with this hag the night she died;
and that she told you something--'

'About the mother of the boy you named,' replied the matron
interrupting him.  'Yes.'

'The first question is, of what nature was her communication?' said
Monks.

'That's the second,' observed the woman with much deliberation. 'The
first is, what may the communication be worth?'

'Who the devil can tell that, without knowing of what kind it is?'
asked Monks.

'Nobody better than you, I am persuaded,' answered Mrs. Bumble: who did
not want for spirit, as her yoke-fellow could abundantly testify.

'Humph!' said Monks significantly, and with a look of eager inquiry;
'there may be money's worth to get, eh?'

'Perhaps there may,' was the composed reply.

'Something that was taken from her,' said Monks.  'Something that she
wore.  Something that--'

'You had better bid,' interrupted Mrs. Bumble.  'I have heard enough,
already, to assure me that you are the man I ought to talk to.'

Mr. Bumble, who had not yet been admitted by his better half into any
greater share of the secret than he had originally possessed, listened
to this dialogue with outstretched neck and distended eyes:  which he
directed towards his wife and Monks, by turns, in undisguised
astonishment; increased, if possible, when the latter sternly demanded,
what sum was required for the disclosure.

'What's it worth to you?' asked the woman, as collectedly as before.

'It may be nothing; it may be twenty pounds,' replied Monks. 'Speak
out, and let me know which.'

'Add five pounds to the sum you have named; give me five-and-twenty
pounds in gold,' said the woman; 'and I'll tell you all I know.  Not
before.'

'Five-and-twenty pounds!' exclaimed Monks, drawing back.

'I spoke as plainly as I could,' replied Mrs. Bumble.  'It's not a
large sum, either.'

'Not a large sum for a paltry secret, that may be nothing when it's
told!' cried Monks impatiently; 'and which has been lying dead for
twelve years past or more!'

'Such matters keep well, and, like good wine, often double their value
in course of time,' answered the matron, still preserving the resolute
indifference she had assumed.  'As to lying dead, there are those who
will lie dead for twelve thousand years to come, or twelve million, for
anything you or I know, who will tell strange tales at last!'

'What if I pay it for nothing?' asked Monks, hesitating.

'You can easily take it away again,' replied the matron. 'I am but a
woman; alone here; and unprotected.'

'Not alone, my dear, nor unprotected, neither,' submitted Mr. Bumble,
in a voice tremulous with fear: '_I_ am here, my dear. And besides,'
said Mr. Bumble, his teeth chattering as he spoke, 'Mr. Monks is too
much of a gentleman to attempt any violence on porochial persons.  Mr.
Monks is aware that I am not a young man, my dear, and also that I am a
little run to seed, as I may say; bu he has heerd:  I say I have no
doubt Mr. Monks has heerd, my dear:  that I am a very determined
officer, with very uncommon strength, if I'm once roused.  I only want
a little rousing; that's all.'

As Mr. Bumble spoke, he made a melancholy feint of grasping his lantern
with fierce determination; and plainly showed, by the alarmed
expression of every feature, that he _did_ want a little rousing, and
not a little, prior to making any very warlike demonstration: unless,
indeed, against paupers, or other person or persons trained down for
the purpose.

'You are a fool,' said Mrs. Bumble, in reply; 'and had better hold your
tongue.'

'He had better have cut it out, before he came, if he can't speak in a
lower tone,' said Monks, grimly.  'So!  He's your husband, eh?'

'He my husband!' tittered the matron, parrying the question.

'I thought as much, when you came in,' rejoined Monks, marking the
angry glance which the lady darted at her spouse as she spoke.  'So
much the better; I have less hesitation in dealing with two people,
when I find that there's only one will between them.  I'm in earnest.
See here!'

He thrust his hand into a side-pocket; and producing a canvas bag, told
out twenty-five sovereigns on the table, and pushed them over to the
woman.

'Now,' he said, 'gather them up; and when this cursed peal of thunder,
which I feel is coming up to break over the house-top, is gone, let's
hear your story.'

The thunder, which seemed in fact much nearer, and to shiver and break
almost over their heads, having subsided, Monks, raising his face from
the table, bent forward to listen to what the woman should say.  The
faces of the three nearly touched, as the two men leant over the small
table in their eagerness to hear, and the woman also leant forward to
render her whisper audible.  The sickly rays of the suspended lantern
falling directly upon them, aggravated the paleness and anxiety of
their countenances: which, encircled by the deepest gloom and darkness,
looked ghastly in the extreme.

'When this woman, that we called old Sally, died,' the matron began,
'she and I were alone.'

'Was there no one by?' asked Monks, in the same hollow whisper; 'No
sick wretch or idiot in some other bed?  No one who could hear, and
might, by possibility, understand?'

'Not a soul,' replied the woman; 'we were alone.  _I_ stood alone
beside the body when death came over it.'

'Good,' said Monks, regarding her attentively.  'Go on.'

'She spoke of a young creature,' resumed the matron, 'who had brought a
child into the world some years before; not merely in the same room,
but in the same bed, in which she then lay dying.'

'Ay?' said Monks, with quivering lip, and glancing over his shoulder,
'Blood!  How things come about!'

'The child was the one you named to him last night,' said the matron,
nodding carelessly towards her husband; 'the mother this nurse had
robbed.'

'In life?' asked Monks.

'In death,' replied the woman, with something like a shudder. 'She
stole from the corpse, when it had hardly turned to one, that which the
dead mother had prayed her, with her last breath, to keep for the
infant's sake.'

'She sold it,' cried Monks, with desperate eagerness; 'did she sell it?
Where?  When?  To whom?  How long before?'

'As she told me, with great difficulty, that she had done this,' said
the matron, 'she fell back and died.'

'Without saying more?' cried Monks, in a voice which, from its very
suppression, seemed only the more furious.  'It's a lie! I'll not be
played with.  She said more.  I'll tear the life out of you both, but
I'll know what it was.'

'She didn't utter another word,' said the woman, to all appearance
unmoved (as Mr. Bumble was very far from being) by the strange man's
violence; 'but she clutched my gown, violently, with one hand, which
was partly closed; and when I saw that she was dead, and so removed the
hand by force, I found it clasped a scrap of dirty paper.'

'Which contained--' interposed Monks, stretching forward.

'Nothing,' replied the woman; 'it was a pawnbroker's duplicate.'

'For what?' demanded Monks.

'In good time I'll tell you.' said the woman.  'I judge that she had
kept the trinket, for some time, in the hope of turning it to better
account; and then had pawned it; and had saved or scraped together
money to pay the pawnbroker's interest year by year, and prevent its
running out; so that if anything came of it, it could still be
redeemed.  Nothing had come of it; and, as I tell you, she died with
the scrap of paper, all worn and tattered, in her hand.  The time was
out in two days; I thought something might one day come of it too; and
so redeemed the pledge.'

'Where is it now?' asked Monks quickly.

'_There_,' replied the woman.  And, as if glad to be relieved of it,
she hastily threw upon the table a small kid bag scarcely large enough
for a French watch, which Monks pouncing upon, tore open with trembling
hands.  It contained a little gold locket: in which were two locks of
hair, and a plain gold wedding-ring.

'It has the word "Agnes" engraved on the inside,' said the woman.

'There is a blank left for the surname; and then follows the date;
which is within a year before the child was born.  I found out that.'

'And this is all?' said Monks, after a close and eager scrutiny of the
contents of the little packet.

'All,' replied the woman.

Mr. Bumble drew a long breath, as if he were glad to find that the
story was over, and no mention made of taking the five-and-twenty
pounds back again; and now he took courage to wipe the perspiration
which had been trickling over his nose, unchecked, during the whole of
the previous dialogue.

'I know nothing of the story, beyond what I can guess at,' said his
wife addressing Monks, after a short silence; 'and I want to know
nothing; for it's safer not.  But I may ask you two questions, may I?'

'You may ask,' said Monks, with some show of surprise; 'but whether I
answer or not is another question.'

'--Which makes three,' observed Mr. Bumble, essaying a stroke of
facetiousness.

'Is that what you expected to get from me?' demanded the matron.

'It is,' replied Monks.  'The other question?'

'What do you propose to do with it?  Can it be used against me?'

'Never,' rejoined Monks; 'nor against me either.  See here!  But don't
move a step forward, or your life is not worth a bulrush.'

With these words, he suddenly wheeled the table aside, and pulling an
iron ring in the boarding, threw back a large trap-door which opened
close at Mr. Bumble's feet, and caused that gentleman to retire several
paces backward, with great precipitation.

'Look down,' said Monks, lowering the lantern into the gulf. 'Don't
fear me.  I could have let you down, quietly enough, when you were
seated over it, if that had been my game.'

Thus encouraged, the matron drew near to the brink; and even Mr. Bumble
himself, impelled by curiousity, ventured to do the same. The turbid
water, swollen by the heavy rain, was rushing rapidly on below; and all
other sounds were lost in the noise of its plashing and eddying against
the green and slimy piles.  There had once been a water-mill beneath;
the tide foaming and chafing round the few rotten stakes, and fragments
of machinery that yet remained, seemed to dart onward, with a new
impulse, when freed from the obstacles which had unavailingly attempted
to stem its headlong course.

'If you flung a man's body down there, where would it be to-morrow
morning?' said Monks, swinging the lantern to and fro in the dark well.

'Twelve miles down the river, and cut to pieces besides,' replied
Bumble, recoiling at the thought.

Monks drew the little packet from his breast, where he had hurriedly
thrust it; and tying it to a leaden weight, which had formed a part of
some pulley, and was lying on the floor, dropped it into the stream.
It fell straight, and true as a die; clove the water with a scarcely
audible splash; and was gone.

The three looking into each other's faces, seemed to breathe more
freely.

'There!' said Monks, closing the trap-door, which fell heavily back
into its former position.  'If the sea ever gives up its dead, as books
say it will, it will keep its gold and silver to itself, and that trash
among it.  We have nothing more to say, and may break up our pleasant
party.'

'By all means,' observed Mr. Bumble, with great alacrity.

'You'll keep a quiet tongue in your head, will you?' said Monks, with a
threatening look.  'I am not afraid of your wife.'

'You may depend upon me, young man,' answered Mr. Bumble, bowing
himself gradually towards the ladder, with excessive politeness. 'On
everybody's account, young man; on my own, you know, Mr. Monks.'

'I am glad, for your sake, to hear it,' remarked Monks. 'Light your
lantern!  And get away from here as fast as you can.'

It was fortunate that the conversation terminated at this point, or Mr.
Bumble, who had bowed himself to within six inches of the ladder, would
infallibly have pitched headlong into the room below.  He lighted his
lantern from that which Monks had detached from the rope, and now
carried in his hand; and making no effort to prolong the discourse,
descended in silence, followed by his wife.  Monks brought up the rear,
after pausing on the steps to satisfy himself that there were no other
sounds to be heard than the beating of the rain without, and the
rushing of the water.

They traversed the lower room, slowly, and with caution; for Monks
started at every shadow; and Mr. Bumble, holding his lantern a foot
above the ground, walked not only with remarkable care, but with a
marvellously light step for a gentleman of his figure:  looking
nervously about him for hidden trap-doors.  The gate at which they had
entered, was softly unfastened and opened by Monks; merely exchanging a
nod with their mysterious acquaintance, the married couple emerged into
the wet and darkness outside.

They were no sooner gone, than Monks, who appeared to entertain an
invincible repugnance to being left alone, called to a boy who had been
hidden somewhere below. Bidding him go first, and bear the light, he
returned to the chamber he had just quitted.



CHAPTER XXXIX

INTRODUCES SOME RESPECTABLE CHARACTERS WITH WHOM THE READER IS ALREADY
ACQUAINTED, AND SHOWS HOW MONKS AND THE JEW LAID THEIR WORTHY HEADS
TOGETHER

On the evening following that upon which the three worthies mentioned
in the last chapter, disposed of their little matter of business as
therein narrated, Mr. William Sikes, awakening from a nap, drowsily
growled forth an inquiry what time of night it was.

The room in which Mr. Sikes propounded this question, was not one of
those he had tenanted, previous to the Chertsey expedition, although it
was in the same quarter of the town, and was situated at no great
distance from his former lodgings.  It was not, in appearance, so
desirable a habitation as his old quarters:  being a mean and
badly-furnished apartment, of very limited size; lighted only by one
small window in the shelving roof, and abutting on a close and dirty
lane.  Nor were there wanting other indications of the good gentleman's
having gone down in the world of late:  for a great scarcity of
furniture, and total absence of comfort, together with the
disappearance of all such small moveables as spare clothes and linen,
bespoke a state of extreme poverty; while the meagre and attenuated
condition of Mr. Sikes himself would have fully confirmed these
symptoms, if they had stood in any need of corroboration.

The housebreaker was lying on the bed, wrapped in his white great-coat,
by way of dressing-gown, and displaying a set of features in no degree
improved by the cadaverous hue of illness, and the addition of a soiled
nightcap, and a stiff, black beard of a week's growth.  The dog sat at
the bedside:  now eyeing his master with a wistful look, and now
pricking his ears, and uttering a low growl as some noise in the
street, or in the lower part of the house, attracted his attention.
Seated by the window, busily engaged in patching an old waistcoat which
formed a portion of the robber's ordinary dress, was a female:  so pale
and reduced with watching and privation, that there would have been
considerable difficulty in recognising her as the same Nancy who has
already figured in this tale, but for the voice in which she replied to
Mr. Sikes's question.

'Not long gone seven,' said the girl.  'How do you feel to-night, Bill?'

'As weak as water,' replied Mr. Sikes, with an imprecation on his eyes
and limbs.  'Here; lend us a hand, and let me get off this thundering
bed anyhow.'

Illness had not improved Mr. Sikes's temper; for, as the girl raised
him up and led him to a chair, he muttered various curses on her
awkwardness, and struck her.

'Whining are you?' said Sikes.  'Come!  Don't stand snivelling there.
If you can't do anything better than that, cut off altogether.  D'ye
hear me?'

'I hear you,' replied the girl, turning her face aside, and forcing a
laugh.  'What fancy have you got in your head now?'

'Oh! you've thought better of it, have you?' growled Sikes, marking the
tear which trembled in her eye.  'All the better for you, you have.'

'Why, you don't mean to say, you'd be hard upon me to-night, Bill,'
said the girl, laying her hand upon his shoulder.

'No!' cried Mr. Sikes.  'Why not?'

'Such a number of nights,' said the girl, with a touch of woman's
tenderness, which communicated something like sweetness of tone, even
to her voice: 'such a number of nights as I've been patient with you,
nursing and caring for you, as if you had been a child: and this the
first that I've seen you like yourself; you wouldn't have served me as
you did just now, if you'd thought of that, would you?  Come, come; say
you wouldn't.'

'Well, then,' rejoined Mr. Sikes, 'I wouldn't.  Why, damme, now, the
girls's whining again!'

'It's nothing,' said the girl, throwing herself into a chair. 'Don't
you seem to mind me.  It'll soon be over.'

'What'll be over?' demanded Mr. Sikes in a savage voice. 'What foolery
are you up to, now, again?  Get up and bustle about, and don't come
over me with your woman's nonsense.'

At any other time, this remonstrance, and the tone in which it was
delivered, would have had the desired effect; but the girl being really
weak and exhausted, dropped her head over the back of the chair, and
fainted, before Mr. Sikes could get out a few of the appropriate oaths
with which, on similar occasions, he was accustomed to garnish his
threats.  Not knowing, very well, what to do, in this uncommon
emergency; for Miss Nancy's hysterics were usually of that violent kind
which the patient fights and struggles out of, without much assistance;
Mr. Sikes tried a little blasphemy: and finding that mode of treatment
wholly ineffectual, called for assistance.

'What's the matter here, my dear?' said Fagin, looking in.

'Lend a hand to the girl, can't you?' replied Sikes impatiently. 'Don't
stand chattering and grinning at me!'

With an exclamation of surprise, Fagin hastened to the girl's
assistance, while Mr. John Dawkins (otherwise the Artful Dodger), who
had followed his venerable friend into the room, hastily deposited on
the floor a bundle with which he was laden; and snatching a bottle from
the grasp of Master Charles Bates who came close at his heels, uncorked
it in a twinkling with his teeth, and poured a portion of its contents
down the patient's throat:  previously taking a taste, himself, to
prevent mistakes.

'Give her a whiff of fresh air with the bellows, Charley,' said Mr.
Dawkins; 'and you slap her hands, Fagin, while Bill undoes the
petticuts.'

These united restoratives, administered with great energy: especially
that department consigned to Master Bates, who appeared to consider his
share in the proceedings, a piece of unexampled pleasantry:  were not
long in producing the desired effect.  The girl gradually recovered her
senses; and, staggering to a chair by the bedside, hid her face upon
the pillow:  leaving Mr. Sikes to confront the new comers, in some
astonishment at their unlooked-for appearance.

'Why, what evil wind has blowed you here?' he asked Fagin.

'No evil wind at all, my dear, for evil winds blow nobody any good; and
I've brought something good with me, that you'll be glad to see.
Dodger, my dear, open the bundle; and give Bill the little trifles that
we spent all our money on, this morning.'

In compliance with Mr. Fagin's request, the Artful untied this bundle,
which was of large size, and formed of an old table-cloth; and handed
the articles it contained, one by one, to Charley Bates: who placed
them on the table, with various encomiums on their rarity and
excellence.

'Sitch a rabbit pie, Bill,' exclaimed that young gentleman, disclosing
to view a huge pasty; 'sitch delicate creeturs, with sitch tender
limbs, Bill, that the wery bones melt in your mouth, and there's no
occasion to pick 'em; half a pound of seven and six-penny green, so
precious strong that if you mix it with biling water, it'll go nigh to
blow the lid of the tea-pot off; a pound and a half of moist sugar that
the niggers didn't work at all at, afore they got it up to sitch a
pitch of goodness,--oh no!  Two half-quartern brans; pound of best
fresh; piece of double Glo'ster; and, to wind up all, some of the
richest sort you ever lushed!'

Uttering this last panegyric, Master Bates produced, from one of his
extensive pockets, a full-sized wine-bottle, carefully corked; while
Mr. Dawkins, at the same instant, poured out a wine-glassful of raw
spirits from the bottle he carried:  which the invalid tossed down his
throat without a moment's hesitation.

'Ah!' said Fagin, rubbing his hands with great satisfaction. 'You'll
do, Bill; you'll do now.'

'Do!' exclaimed Mr. Sikes; 'I might have been done for, twenty times
over, afore you'd have done anything to help me.  What do you mean by
leaving a man in this state, three weeks and more, you false-hearted
wagabond?'

'Only hear him, boys!' said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders. 'And us
come to bring him all these beau-ti-ful things.'

'The things is well enough in their way,' observed Mr. Sikes:  a little
soothed as he glanced over the table; 'but what have you got to say for
yourself, why you should leave me here, down in the mouth, health,
blunt, and everything else; and take no more notice of me, all this
mortal time, than if I was that 'ere dog.--Drive him down, Charley!'

'I never see such a jolly dog as that,' cried Master Bates, doing as he
was desired.  'Smelling the grub like a old lady a going to market!
He'd make his fortun' on the stage that dog would, and rewive the
drayma besides.'

'Hold your din,' cried Sikes, as the dog retreated under the bed: still
growling angrily.  'What have you got to say for yourself, you withered
old fence, eh?'

'I was away from London, a week and more, my dear, on a plant,' replied
the Jew.

'And what about the other fortnight?' demanded Sikes.  'What about the
other fortnight that you've left me lying here, like a sick rat in his
hole?'

'I couldn't help it, Bill.  I can't go into a long explanation before
company; but I couldn't help it, upon my honour.'

'Upon your what?' growled Sikes, with excessive disgust. 'Here! Cut me
off a piece of that pie, one of you boys, to take the taste of that out
of my mouth, or it'll choke me dead.'

'Don't be out of temper, my dear,' urged Fagin, submissively. 'I have
never forgot you, Bill; never once.'

'No!  I'll pound it that you han't,' replied Sikes, with a bitter grin.
'You've been scheming and plotting away, every hour that I have laid
shivering and burning here; and Bill was to do this; and Bill was to do
that; and Bill was to do it all, dirt cheap, as soon as he got well:
and was quite poor enough for your work. If it hadn't been for the
girl, I might have died.'

'There now, Bill,' remonstrated Fagin, eagerly catching at the word.
'If it hadn't been for the girl!  Who but poor ould Fagin was the means
of your having such a handy girl about you?'

'He says true enough there!' said Nancy, coming hastily forward. 'Let
him be; let him be.'

Nancy's appearance gave a new turn to the conversation; for the boys,
receiving a sly wink from the wary old Jew, began to ply her with
liquor: of which, however, she took very sparingly; while Fagin,
assuming an unusual flow of spirits, gradually brought Mr. Sikes into a
better temper, by affecting to regard his threats as a little pleasant
banter; and, moreover, by laughing very heartily at one or two rough
jokes, which, after repeated applications to the spirit-bottle, he
condescended to make.

'It's all very well,' said Mr. Sikes; 'but I must have some blunt from
you to-night.'

'I haven't a piece of coin about me,' replied the Jew.

'Then you've got lots at home,' retorted Sikes; 'and I must have some
from there.'

'Lots!' cried Fagin, holding up is hands.  'I haven't so much as
would--'

'I don't know how much you've got, and I dare say you hardly know
yourself, as it would take a pretty long time to count it,' said Sikes;
'but I must have some to-night; and that's flat.'

'Well, well,' said Fagin, with a sigh, 'I'll send the Artful round
presently.'

'You won't do nothing of the kind,' rejoined Mr. Sikes. 'The Artful's a
deal too artful, and would forget to come, or lose his way, or get
dodged by traps and so be perwented, or anything for an excuse, if you
put him up to it.  Nancy shall go to the ken and fetch it, to make all
sure; and I'll lie down and have a snooze while she's gone.'

After a great deal of haggling and squabbling, Fagin beat down the
amount of the required advance from five pounds to three pounds four
and sixpence: protesting with many solemn asseverations that that would
only leave him eighteen-pence to keep house with; Mr. Sikes sullenly
remarking that if he couldn't get any more he must accompany him home;
with the Dodger and Master Bates put the eatables in the cupboard.  The
Jew then, taking leave of his affectionate friend, returned homeward,
attended by Nancy and the boys:  Mr. Sikes, meanwhile, flinging himself
on the bed, and composing himself to sleep away the time until the
young lady's return.

In due course, they arrived at Fagin's abode, where they found Toby
Crackit and Mr. Chitling intent upon their fifteenth game at cribbage,
which it is scarcely necessary to say the latter gentleman lost, and
with it, his fifteenth and last sixpence: much to the amusement of his
young friends.  Mr. Crackit, apparently somewhat ashamed at being found
relaxing himself with a gentleman so much his inferior in station and
mental endowments, yawned, and inquiring after Sikes, took up his hat
to go.

'Has nobody been, Toby?' asked Fagin.

'Not a living leg,' answered Mr. Crackit, pulling up his collar; 'it's
been as dull as swipes.  You ought to stand something handsome, Fagin,
to recompense me for keeping house so long. Damme, I'm as flat as a
juryman; and should have gone to sleep, as fast as Newgate, if I hadn't
had the good natur' to amuse this youngster.  Horrid dull, I'm blessed
if I an't!'

With these and other ejaculations of the same kind, Mr. Toby Crackit
swept up his winnings, and crammed them into his waistcoat pocket with
a haughty air, as though such small pieces of silver were wholly
beneath the consideration of a man of his figure; this done, he
swaggered out of the room, with so much elegance and gentility, that
Mr. Chitling, bestowing numerous admiring glances on his legs and boots
till they were out of sight, assured the company that he considered his
acquaintance cheap at fifteen sixpences an interview, and that he
didn't value his losses the snap of his little finger.

'Wot a rum chap you are, Tom!' said Master Bates, highly amused by this
declaration.

'Not a bit of it,' replied Mr. Chitling.  'Am I, Fagin?'

'A very clever fellow, my dear,' said Fagin, patting him on the
shoulder, and winking to his other pupils.

'And Mr. Crackit is a heavy swell; an't he, Fagin?' asked Tom.

'No doubt at all of that, my dear.'

'And it is a creditable thing to have his acquaintance; an't it,
Fagin?' pursued Tom.

'Very much so, indeed, my dear.  They're only jealous, Tom, because he
won't give it to them.'

'Ah!' cried Tom, triumphantly, 'that's where it is!  He has cleaned me
out.  But I can go and earn some more, when I like; can't I, Fagin?'

'To be sure you can, and the sooner you go the better, Tom; so make up
your loss at once, and don't lose any more time.  Dodger! Charley!
It's time you were on the lay.  Come!  It's near ten, and nothing done
yet.'

In obedience to this hint, the boys, nodding to Nancy, took up their
hats, and left the room; the Dodger and his vivacious friend indulging,
as they went, in many witticisms at the expense of Mr. Chitling; in
whose conduct, it is but justice to say, there was nothing very
conspicuous or peculiar:  inasmuch as there are a great number of
spirited young bloods upon town, who pay a much higher price than Mr.
Chitling for being seen in good society:  and a great number of fine
gentlemen (composing the good society aforesaid) who established their
reputation upon very much the same footing as flash Toby Crackit.

'Now,' said Fagin, when they had left the room, 'I'll go and get you
that cash, Nancy.  This is only the key of a little cupboard where I
keep a few odd things the boys get, my dear.  I never lock up my money,
for I've got none to lock up, my dear--ha! ha! ha!--none to lock up.
It's a poor trade, Nancy, and no thanks; but I'm fond of seeing the
young people about me; and I bear it all, I bear it all.  Hush!' he
said, hastily concealing the key in his breast; 'who's that?  Listen!'

The girl, who was sitting at the table with her arms folded, appeared
in no way interested in the arrival: or to care whether the person,
whoever he was, came or went:  until the murmur of a man's voice
reached her ears.  The instant she caught the sound, she tore off her
bonnet and shawl, with the rapidity of lightning, and thrust them under
the table. The Jew, turning round immediately afterwards, she muttered
a complaint of the heat:  in a tone of languor that contrasted, very
remarkably, with the extreme haste and violence of this action:  which,
however, had been unobserved by Fagin, who had his back towards her at
the time.

'Bah!' he whispered, as though nettled by the interruption; 'it's the
man I expected before; he's coming downstairs.  Not a word about the
money while he's here, Nance.  He won't stop long.  Not ten minutes, my
dear.'

Laying his skinny forefinger upon his lip, the Jew carried a candle to
the door, as a man's step was heard upon the stairs without.  He
reached it, at the same moment as the visitor, who, coming hastily into
the room, was close upon the girl before he observed her.

It was Monks.

'Only one of my young people,' said Fagin, observing that Monks drew
back, on beholding a stranger.  'Don't move, Nancy.'

The girl drew closer to the table, and glancing at Monks with an air of
careless levity, withdrew her eyes; but as he turned towards Fagin, she
stole another look; so keen and searching, and full of purpose, that if
there had been any bystander to observe the change, he could hardly
have believed the two looks to have proceeded from the same person.

'Any news?' inquired Fagin.

'Great.'

'And--and--good?' asked Fagin, hesitating as though he feared to vex
the other man by being too sanguine.

'Not bad, any way,' replied Monks with a smile.  'I have been prompt
enough this time.  Let me have a word with you.'

The girl drew closer to the table, and made no offer to leave the room,
although she could see that Monks was pointing to her.  The Jew:
perhaps fearing she might say something aloud about the money, if he
endeavoured to get rid of her:  pointed upward, and took Monks out of
the room.

'Not that infernal hole we were in before,' she could hear the man say
as they went upstairs.  Fagin laughed; and making some reply which did
not reach her, seemed, by the creaking of the boards, to lead his
companion to the second story.

Before the sound of their footsteps had ceased to echo through the
house, the girl had slipped off her shoes; and drawing her gown loosely
over her head, and muffling her arms in it, stood at the door,
listening with breathless interest.  The moment the noise ceased, she
glided from the room; ascended the stairs with incredible softness and
silence; and was lost in the gloom above.

The room remained deserted for a quarter of an hour or more; the girl
glided back with the same unearthly tread; and, immediately afterwards,
the two men were heard descending.  Monks went at once into the street;
and the Jew crawled upstairs again for the money.  When he returned,
the girl was adjusting her shawl and bonnet, as if preparing to be gone.

'Why, Nance!' exclaimed the Jew, starting back as he put down the
candle, 'how pale you are!'

'Pale!' echoed the girl, shading her eyes with her hands, as if to look
steadily at him.

'Quite horrible.  What have you been doing to yourself?'

'Nothing that I know of, except sitting in this close place for I don't
know how long and all,' replied the girl carelessly. 'Come!  Let me get
back; that's a dear.'

With a sigh for every piece of money, Fagin told the amount into her
hand.  They parted without more conversation, merely interchanging a
'good-night.'

When the girl got into the open street, she sat down upon a doorstep;
and seemed, for a few moments, wholly bewildered and unable to pursue
her way.  Suddenly she arose; and hurrying on, in a direction quite
opposite to that in which Sikes was awaiting her returned, quickened
her pace, until it gradually resolved into a violent run.  After
completely exhausting herself, she stopped to take breath:  and, as if
suddenly recollecting herself, and deploring her inability to do
something she was bent upon, wrung her hands, and burst into tears.

It might be that her tears relieved her, or that she felt the full
hopelessness of her condition; but she turned back; and hurrying with
nearly as great rapidity in the contrary direction; partly to recover
lost time, and partly to keep pace with the violent current of her own
thoughts:  soon reached the dwelling where she had left the
housebreaker.

If she betrayed any agitation, when she presented herself to Mr. Sikes,
he did not observe it; for merely inquiring if she had brought the
money, and receiving a reply in the affirmative, he uttered a growl of
satisfaction, and replacing his head upon the pillow, resumed the
slumbers which her arrival had interrupted.

It was fortunate for her that the possession of money occasioned him so
much employment next day in the way of eating and drinking; and withal
had so beneficial an effect in smoothing down the asperities of his
temper; that he had neither time nor inclination to be very critical
upon her behaviour and deportment.  That she had all the abstracted and
nervous manner of one who is on the eve of some bold and hazardous
step, which it has required no common struggle to resolve upon, would
have been obvious to the lynx-eyed Fagin, who would most probably have
taken the alarm at once; but Mr. Sikes lacking the niceties of
discrimination, and being troubled with no more subtle misgivings than
those which resolve themselves into a dogged roughness of behaviour
towards everybody; and being, furthermore, in an unusually amiable
condition, as has been already observed; saw nothing unusual in her
demeanor, and indeed, troubled himself so little about her, that, had
her agitation been far more perceptible than it was, it would have been
very unlikely to have awakened his suspicions.

As that day closed in, the girl's excitement increased; and, when night
came on, and she sat by, watching until the housebreaker should drink
himself asleep, there was an unusual paleness in her cheek, and a fire
in her eye, that even Sikes observed with astonishment.

Mr. Sikes being weak from the fever, was lying in bed, taking hot water
with his gin to render it less inflammatory; and had pushed his glass
towards Nancy to be replenished for the third or fourth time, when
these symptoms first struck him.

'Why, burn my body!' said the man, raising himself on his hands as he
stared the girl in the face.  'You look like a corpse come to life
again.  What's the matter?'

'Matter!' replied the girl.  'Nothing.  What do you look at me so hard
for?'

'What foolery is this?' demanded Sikes, grasping her by the arm, and
shaking her roughly.  'What is it?  What do you mean?  What are you
thinking of?'

'Of many things, Bill,' replied the girl, shivering, and as she did so,
pressing her hands upon her eyes.  'But, Lord!  What odds in that?'

The tone of forced gaiety in which the last words were spoken, seemed
to produce a deeper impression on Sikes than the wild and rigid look
which had preceded them.

'I tell you wot it is,' said Sikes; 'if you haven't caught the fever,
and got it comin' on, now, there's something more than usual in the
wind, and something dangerous too.  You're not a-going to--.  No,
damme! you wouldn't do that!'

'Do what?' asked the girl.

'There ain't,' said Sikes, fixing his eyes upon her, and muttering the
words to himself; 'there ain't a stauncher-hearted gal going, or I'd
have cut her throat three months ago.  She's got the fever coming on;
that's it.'

Fortifying himself with this assurance, Sikes drained the glass to the
bottom, and then, with many grumbling oaths, called for his physic.
The girl jumped up, with great alacrity; poured it quickly out, but
with her back towards him; and held the vessel to his lips, while he
drank off the contents.

'Now,' said the robber, 'come and sit aside of me, and put on your own
face; or I'll alter it so, that you won't know it agin when you do want
it.'

The girl obeyed.  Sikes, locking her hand in his, fell back upon the
pillow: turning his eyes upon her face.  They closed; opened again;
closed once more; again opened.  He shifted his position restlessly;
and, after dozing again, and again, for two or three minutes, and as
often springing up with a look of terror, and gazing vacantly about
him, was suddenly stricken, as it were, while in the very attitude of
rising, into a deep and heavy sleep.  The grasp of his hand relaxed;
the upraised arm fell languidly by his side; and he lay like one in a
profound trance.

'The laudanum has taken effect at last,' murmured the girl, as she rose
from the bedside.  'I may be too late, even now.'

She hastily dressed herself in her bonnet and shawl:  looking fearfully
round, from time to time, as if, despite the sleeping draught, she
expected every moment to feel the pressure of Sikes's heavy hand upon
her shoulder; then, stooping softly over the bed, she kissed the
robber's lips; and then opening and closing the room-door with
noiseless touch, hurried from the house.

A watchman was crying half-past nine, down a dark passage through which
she had to pass, in gaining the main thoroughfare.

'Has it long gone the half-hour?' asked the girl.

'It'll strike the hour in another quarter,' said the man: raising his
lantern to her face.

'And I cannot get there in less than an hour or more,' muttered Nancy:
brushing swiftly past him, and gliding rapidly down the street.

Many of the shops were already closing in the back lanes and avenues
through which she tracked her way, in making from Spitalfields towards
the West-End of London.  The clock struck ten, increasing her
impatience.  She tore along the narrow pavement:  elbowing the
passengers from side to side; and darting almost under the horses'
heads, crossed crowded streets, where clusters of persons were eagerly
watching their opportunity to do the like.

'The woman is mad!' said the people, turning to look after her as she
rushed away.

When she reached the more wealthy quarter of the town, the streets were
comparatively deserted; and here her headlong progress excited a still
greater curiosity in the stragglers whom she hurried past.  Some
quickened their pace behind, as though to see whither she was hastening
at such an unusual rate; and a few made head upon her, and looked back,
surprised at her undiminished speed; but they fell off one by one; and
when she neared her place of destination, she was alone.

It was a family hotel in a quiet but handsome street near Hyde Park.
As the brilliant light of the lamp which burnt before its door, guided
her to the spot, the clock struck eleven.  She had loitered for a few
paces as though irresolute, and making up her mind to advance; but the
sound determined her, and she stepped into the hall.  The porter's seat
was vacant.  She looked round with an air of incertitude, and advanced
towards the stairs.

'Now, young woman!' said a smartly-dressed female, looking out from a
door behind her, 'who do you want here?'

'A lady who is stopping in this house,' answered the girl.

'A lady!' was the reply, accompanied with a scornful look. 'What lady?'

'Miss Maylie,' said Nancy.

The young woman, who had by this time, noted her appearance, replied
only by a look of virtuous disdain; and summoned a man to answer her.
To him, Nancy repeated her request.

'What name am I to say?' asked the waiter.

'It's of no use saying any,' replied Nancy.

'Nor business?' said the man.

'No, nor that neither,' rejoined the girl.  'I must see the lady.'

'Come!' said the man, pushing her towards the door.  'None of this.
Take yourself off.'

'I shall be carried out if I go!' said the girl violently; 'and I can
make that a job that two of you won't like to do.  Isn't there anybody
here,' she said, looking round, 'that will see a simple message carried
for a poor wretch like me?'

This appeal produced an effect on a good-tempered-faced man-cook, who
with some of the other servants was looking on, and who stepped forward
to interfere.

'Take it up for her, Joe; can't you?' said this person.

'What's the good?' replied the man.  'You don't suppose the young lady
will see such as her; do you?'

This allusion to Nancy's doubtful character, raised a vast quantity of
chaste wrath in the bosoms of four housemaids, who remarked, with great
fervour, that the creature was a disgrace to her sex; and strongly
advocated her being thrown, ruthlessly, into the kennel.

'Do what you like with me,' said the girl, turning to the men again;
'but do what I ask you first, and I ask you to give this message for
God Almighty's sake.'

The soft-hearted cook added his intercession, and the result was that
the man who had first appeared undertook its delivery.

'What's it to be?' said the man, with one foot on the stairs.

'That a young woman earnestly asks to speak to Miss Maylie alone,' said
Nancy; 'and that if the lady will only hear the first word she has to
say, she will know whether to hear her business, or to have her turned
out of doors as an impostor.'

'I say,' said the man, 'you're coming it strong!'

'You give the message,' said the girl firmly; 'and let me hear the
answer.'

The man ran upstairs.  Nancy remained, pale and almost breathless,
listening with quivering lip to the very audible expressions of scorn,
of which the chaste housemaids were very prolific; and of which they
became still more so, when the man returned, and said the young woman
was to walk upstairs.

'It's no good being proper in this world,' said the first housemaid.

'Brass can do better than the gold what has stood the fire,' said the
second.

The third contented herself with wondering 'what ladies was made of';
and the fourth took the first in a quartette of 'Shameful!' with which
the Dianas concluded.

Regardless of all this: for she had weightier matters at heart: Nancy
followed the man, with trembling limbs, to a small ante-chamber,
lighted by a lamp from the ceiling. Here he left her, and retired.



CHAPTER XL

A STRANGE INTERVIEW, WHICH IS A SEQUEL TO THE LAST CHAMBER

The girl's life had been squandered in the streets, and among the most
noisome of the stews and dens of London, but there was something of the
woman's original nature left in her still; and when she heard a light
step approaching the door opposite to that by which she had entered,
and thought of the wide contrast which the small room would in another
moment contain, she felt burdened with the sense of her own deep shame,
and shrunk as though she could scarcely bear the presence of her with
whom she had sought this interview.

But struggling with these better feelings was pride,--the vice of the
lowest and most debased creatures no less than of the high and
self-assured.  The miserable companion of thieves and ruffians, the
fallen outcast of low haunts, the associate of the scourings of the
jails and hulks, living within the shadow of the gallows itself,--even
this degraded being felt too proud to betray a feeble gleam of the
womanly feeling which she thought a weakness, but which alone connected
her with that humanity, of which her wasting life had obliterated so
many, many traces when a very child.

She raised her eyes sufficiently to observe that the figure which
presented itself was that of a slight and beautiful girl; then, bending
them on the ground, she tossed her head with affected carelessness as
she said:

'It's a hard matter to get to see you, lady.  If I had taken offence,
and gone away, as many would have done, you'd have been sorry for it
one day, and not without reason either.'

'I am very sorry if any one has behaved harshly to you,' replied Rose.
'Do not think of that.  Tell me why you wished to see me. I am the
person you inquired for.'

The kind tone of this answer, the sweet voice, the gentle manner, the
absence of any accent of haughtiness or displeasure, took the girl
completely by surprise, and she burst into tears.

'Oh, lady, lady!' she said, clasping her hands passionately before her
face, 'if there was more like you, there would be fewer like me,--there
would--there would!'

'Sit down,' said Rose, earnestly.  'If you are in poverty or affliction
I shall be truly glad to relieve you if I can,--I shall indeed.  Sit
down.'

'Let me stand, lady,' said the girl, still weeping, 'and do not speak
to me so kindly till you know me better.  It is growing late.
Is--is--that door shut?'

'Yes,' said Rose, recoiling a few steps, as if to be nearer assistance
in case she should require it.  'Why?'

'Because,' said the girl, 'I am about to put my life and the lives of
others in your hands.  I am the girl that dragged little Oliver back to
old Fagin's on the night he went out from the house in Pentonville.'

'You!' said Rose Maylie.

'I, lady!' replied the girl.  'I am the infamous creature you have
heard of, that lives among the thieves, and that never from the first
moment I can recollect my eyes and senses opening on London streets
have known any better life, or kinder words than they have given me, so
help me God!  Do not mind shrinking openly from me, lady.  I am younger
than you would think, to look at me, but I am well used to it. The
poorest women fall back, as I make my way along the crowded pavement.'

'What dreadful things are these!' said Rose, involuntarily falling from
her strange companion.

'Thank Heaven upon your knees, dear lady,' cried the girl, 'that you
had friends to care for and keep you in your childhood, and that you
were never in the midst of cold and hunger, and riot and drunkenness,
and--and--something worse than all--as I have been from my cradle.  I
may use the word, for the alley and the gutter were mine, as they will
be my deathbed.'

'I pity you!' said Rose, in a broken voice.  'It wrings my heart to
hear you!'

'Heaven bless you for your goodness!' rejoined the girl. 'If you knew
what I am sometimes, you would pity me, indeed. But I have stolen away
from those who would surely murder me, if they knew I had been here, to
tell you what I have overheard.  Do you know a man named Monks?'

'No,' said Rose.

'He knows you,' replied the girl; 'and knew you were here, for it was
by hearing him tell the place that I found you out.'

'I never heard the name,' said Rose.

'Then he goes by some other amongst us,' rejoined the girl, 'which I
more than thought before.  Some time ago, and soon after Oliver was put
into your house on the night of the robbery, I--suspecting this
man--listened to a conversation held between him and Fagin in the dark.
I found out, from what I heard, that Monks--the man I asked you about,
you know--'

'Yes,' said Rose, 'I understand.'

'--That Monks,' pursued the girl, 'had seen him accidently with two of
our boys on the day we first lost him, and had known him directly to be
the same child that he was watching for, though I couldn't make out
why.  A bargain was struck with Fagin, that if Oliver was got back he
should have a certain sum; and he was to have more for making him a
thief, which this Monks wanted for some purpose of his own.'

'For what purpose?' asked Rose.

'He caught sight of my shadow on the wall as I listened, in the hope of
finding out,' said the girl; 'and there are not many people besides me
that could have got out of their way in time to escape discovery.  But
I did; and I saw him no more till last night.'

'And what occurred then?'

'I'll tell you, lady.  Last night he came again.  Again they went
upstairs, and I, wrapping myself up so that my shadow would not betray
me, again listened at the door.  The first words I heard Monks say were
these:  "So the only proofs of the boy's identity lie at the bottom of
the river, and the old hag that received them from the mother is
rotting in her coffin."  They laughed, and talked of his success in
doing this; and Monks, talking on about the boy, and getting very wild,
said that though he had got the young devil's money safely now, he'd
rather have had it the other way; for, what a game it would have been
to have brought down the boast of the father's will, by driving him
through every jail in town, and then hauling him up for some capital
felony which Fagin could easily manage, after having made a good profit
of him besides.'

'What is all this!' said Rose.

'The truth, lady, though it comes from my lips,' replied the girl.
'Then, he said, with oaths common enough in my ears, but strange to
yours, that if he could gratify his hatred by taking the boy's life
without bringing his own neck in danger, he would; but, as he couldn't,
he'd be upon the watch to meet him at every turn in life; and if he
took advantage of his birth and history, he might harm him yet. "In
short, Fagin," he says, "Jew as you are, you never laid such snares as
I'll contrive for my young brother, Oliver."'

'His brother!' exclaimed Rose.

'Those were his words,' said Nancy, glancing uneasily round, as she had
scarcely ceased to do, since she began to speak, for a vision of Sikes
haunted her perpetually.  'And more. When he spoke of you and the other
lady, and said it seemed contrived by Heaven, or the devil, against
him, that Oliver should come into your hands, he laughed, and said
there was some comfort in that too, for how many thousands and hundreds
of thousands of pounds would you not give, if you had them, to know who
your two-legged spaniel was.'

'You do not mean,' said Rose, turning very pale, 'to tell me that this
was said in earnest?'

'He spoke in hard and angry earnest, if a man ever did,' replied the
girl, shaking her head.  'He is an earnest man when his hatred is up.
I know many who do worse things; but I'd rather listen to them all a
dozen times, than to that Monks once.  It is growing late, and I have
to reach home without suspicion of having been on such an errand as
this.  I must get back quickly.'

'But what can I do?' said Rose.  'To what use can I turn this
communication without you?  Back!  Why do you wish to return to
companions you paint in such terrible colors?  If you repeat this
information to a gentleman whom I can summon in an instant from the
next room, you can be consigned to some place of safety without half an
hour's delay.'

'I wish to go back,' said the girl.  'I must go back, because--how can
I tell such things to an innocent lady like you?--because among the men
I have told you of, there is one: the most desperate among them all;
that I can't leave:  no, not even to be saved from the life I am
leading now.'

'Your having interfered in this dear boy's behalf before,' said Rose;
'your coming here, at so great a risk, to tell me what you have heard;
your manner, which convinces me of the truth of what you say; your
evident contrition, and sense of shame; all lead me to believe that you
might yet be reclaimed.  Oh!' said the earnest girl, folding her hands
as the tears coursed down her face, 'do not turn a deaf ear to the
entreaties of one of your own sex; the first--the first, I do believe,
who ever appealed to you in the voice of pity and compassion.  Do hear
my words, and let me save you yet, for better things.'

'Lady,' cried the girl, sinking on her knees, 'dear, sweet, angel lady,
you _are_ the first that ever blessed me with such words as these, and
if I had heard them years ago, they might have turned me from a life of
sin and sorrow; but it is too late, it is too late!'

'It is never too late,' said Rose, 'for penitence and atonement.'

'It is,' cried the girl, writhing in agony of her mind; 'I cannot leave
him now!  I could not be his death.'

'Why should you be?' asked Rose.

'Nothing could save him,' cried the girl.  'If I told others what I
have told you, and led to their being taken, he would be sure to die.
He is the boldest, and has been so cruel!'

'Is it possible,' cried Rose, 'that for such a man as this, you can
resign every future hope, and the certainty of immediate rescue?  It is
madness.'

'I don't know what it is,' answered the girl; 'I only know that it is
so, and not with me alone, but with hundreds of others as bad and
wretched as myself.  I must go back.  Whether it is God's wrath for the
wrong I have done, I do not know; but I am drawn back to him through
every suffering and ill usage; and I should be, I believe, if I knew
that I was to die by his hand at last.'

'What am I to do?' said Rose.  'I should not let you depart from me
thus.'

'You should, lady, and I know you will,' rejoined the girl, rising.
'You will not stop my going because I have trusted in your goodness,
and forced no promise from you, as I might have done.'

'Of what use, then, is the communication you have made?' said Rose.
'This mystery must be investigated, or how will its disclosure to me,
benefit Oliver, whom you are anxious to serve?'

'You must have some kind gentleman about you that will hear it as a
secret, and advise you what to do,' rejoined the girl.

'But where can I find you again when it is necessary?' asked Rose.  'I
do not seek to know where these dreadful people live, but where will
you be walking or passing at any settled period from this time?'

'Will you promise me that you will have my secret strictly kept, and
come alone, or with the only other person that knows it; and that I
shall not be watched or followed?' asked the girl.

'I promise you solemnly,' answered Rose.

'Every Sunday night, from eleven until the clock strikes twelve,' said
the girl without hesitation, 'I will walk on London Bridge if I am
alive.'

'Stay another moment,' interposed Rose, as the girl moved hurriedly
towards the door.  'Think once again on your own condition, and the
opportunity you have of escaping from it.  You have a claim on me:  not
only as the voluntary bearer of this intelligence, but as a woman lost
almost beyond redemption.  Will you return to this gang of robbers, and
to this man, when a word can save you?  What fascination is it that can
take you back, and make you cling to wickedness and misery?  Oh! is
there no chord in your heart that I can touch!  Is there nothing left,
to which I can appeal against this terrible infatuation!'

'When ladies as young, and good, and beautiful as you are,' replied the
girl steadily, 'give away your hearts, love will carry you all
lengths--even such as you, who have home, friends, other admirers,
everything, to fill them.  When such as I, who have no certain roof but
the coffinlid, and no friend in sickness or death but the hospital
nurse, set our rotten hearts on any man, and let him fill the place
that has been a blank through all our wretched lives, who can hope to
cure us?  Pity us, lady--pity us for having only one feeling of the
woman left, and for having that turned, by a heavy judgment, from a
comfort and a pride, into a new means of violence and suffering.'

'You will,' said Rose, after a pause, 'take some money from me, which
may enable you to live without dishonesty--at all events until we meet
again?'

'Not a penny,' replied the girl, waving her hand.

'Do not close your heart against all my efforts to help you,' said
Rose, stepping gently forward.  'I wish to serve you indeed.'

'You would serve me best, lady,' replied the girl, wringing her hands,
'if you could take my life at once; for I have felt more grief to think
of what I am, to-night, than I ever did before, and it would be
something not to die in the hell in which I have lived.  God bless you,
sweet lady, and send as much happiness on your head as I have brought
shame on mine!'

Thus speaking, and sobbing aloud, the unhappy creature turned away;
while Rose Maylie, overpowered by this extraordinary interview, which
had more the semblance of a rapid dream than an actual occurrence, sank
into a chair, and endeavoured to collect her wandering thoughts.



CHAPTER XLI

CONTAINING FRESH DISCOVERIES, AND SHOWING THAT SUPRISES, LIKE
MISFORTUNES, SELDOM COME ALONE

Her situation was, indeed, one of no common trial and difficulty. While
she felt the most eager and burning desire to penetrate the mystery in
which Oliver's history was enveloped, she could not but hold sacred the
confidence which the miserable woman with whom she had just conversed,
had reposed in her, as a young and guileless girl.  Her words and
manner had touched Rose Maylie's heart; and, mingled with her love for
her young charge, and scarcely less intense in its truth and fervour,
was her fond wish to win the outcast back to repentance and hope.

They purposed remaining in London only three days, prior to departing
for some weeks to a distant part of the coast.  It was now midnight of
the first day.  What course of action could she determine upon, which
could be adopted in eight-and-forty hours? Or how could she postpone
the journey without exciting suspicion?

Mr. Losberne was with them, and would be for the next two days; but
Rose was too well acquainted with the excellent gentleman's
impetuosity, and foresaw too clearly the wrath with which, in the first
explosion of his indignation, he would regard the instrument of
Oliver's recapture, to trust him with the secret, when her
representations in the girl's behalf could be seconded by no
experienced person.  These were all reasons for the greatest caution
and most circumspect behaviour in communicating it to Mrs. Maylie,
whose first impulse would infallibly be to hold a conference with the
worthy doctor on the subject.  As to resorting to any legal adviser,
even if she had known how to do so, it was scarcely to be thought of,
for the same reason.  Once the thought occurred to her of seeking
assistance from Harry; but this awakened the recollection of their last
parting, and it seemed unworthy of her to call him back, when--the
tears rose to her eyes as she pursued this train of reflection--he
might have by this time learnt to forget her, and to be happier away.

Disturbed by these different reflections; inclining now to one course
and then to another, and again recoiling from all, as each successive
consideration presented itself to her mind; Rose passed a sleepless and
anxious night.  After more communing with herself next day, she arrived
at the desperate conclusion of consulting Harry.

'If it be painful to him,' she thought, 'to come back here, how painful
it will be to me!  But perhaps he will not come; he may write, or he
may come himself, and studiously abstain from meeting me--he did when
he went away.  I hardly thought he would; but it was better for us
both.'  And here Rose dropped the pen, and turned away, as though the
very paper which was to be her messenger should not see her weep.

She had taken up the same pen, and laid it down again fifty times, and
had considered and reconsidered the first line of her letter without
writing the first word, when Oliver, who had been walking in the
streets, with Mr. Giles for a body-guard, entered the room in such
breathless haste and violent agitation, as seemed to betoken some new
cause of alarm.

'What makes you look so flurried?' asked Rose, advancing to meet him.

'I hardly know how; I feel as if I should be choked,' replied the boy.
'Oh dear!  To think that I should see him at last, and you should be
able to know that I have told you the truth!'

'I never thought you had told us anything but the truth,' said Rose,
soothing him.  'But what is this?--of whom do you speak?'

'I have seen the gentleman,' replied Oliver, scarcely able to
articulate, 'the gentleman who was so good to me--Mr. Brownlow, that we
have so often talked about.'

'Where?' asked Rose.

'Getting out of a coach,' replied Oliver, shedding tears of delight,
'and going into a house.  I didn't speak to him--I couldn't speak to
him, for he didn't see me, and I trembled so, that I was not able to go
up to him.  But Giles asked, for me, whether he lived there, and they
said he did.  Look here,' said Oliver, opening a scrap of paper, 'here
it is; here's where he lives--I'm going there directly!  Oh, dear me,
dear me!  What shall I do when I come to see him and hear him speak
again!'

With her attention not a little distracted by these and a great many
other incoherent exclamations of joy, Rose read the address, which was
Craven Street, in the Strand.  She very soon determined upon turning
the discovery to account.

'Quick!' she said.  'Tell them to fetch a hackney-coach, and be ready
to go with me.  I will take you there directly, without a minute's loss
of time.  I will only tell my aunt that we are going out for an hour,
and be ready as soon as you are.'

Oliver needed no prompting to despatch, and in little more than five
minutes they were on their way to Craven Street.  When they arrived
there, Rose left Oliver in the coach, under pretence of preparing the
old gentleman to receive him; and sending up her card by the servant,
requested to see Mr. Brownlow on very pressing business.  The servant
soon returned, to beg that she would walk upstairs; and following him
into an upper room, Miss Maylie was presented to an elderly gentleman
of benevolent appearance, in a bottle-green coat.  At no great distance
from whom, was seated another old gentleman, in nankeen breeches and
gaiters; who did not look particularly benevolent, and who was sitting
with his hands clasped on the top of a thick stick, and his chin
propped thereupon.

'Dear me,' said the gentleman, in the bottle-green coat, hastily rising
with great politeness, 'I beg your pardon, young lady--I imagined it
was some importunate person who--I beg you will excuse me.  Be seated,
pray.'

'Mr. Brownlow, I believe, sir?' said Rose, glancing from the other
gentleman to the one who had spoken.

'That is my name,' said the old gentleman.  'This is my friend, Mr.
Grimwig.  Grimwig, will you leave us for a few minutes?'

'I believe,' interposed Miss Maylie, 'that at this period of our
interview, I need not give that gentleman the trouble of going away.
If I am correctly informed, he is cognizant of the business on which I
wish to speak to you.'

Mr. Brownlow inclined his head.  Mr. Grimwig, who had made one very
stiff bow, and risen from his chair, made another very stiff bow, and
dropped into it again.

'I shall surprise you very much, I have no doubt,' said Rose, naturally
embarrassed; 'but you once showed great benevolence and goodness to a
very dear young friend of mine, and I am sure you will take an interest
in hearing of him again.'

'Indeed!' said Mr. Brownlow.

'Oliver Twist you knew him as,' replied Rose.

The words no sooner escaped her lips, than Mr. Grimwig, who had been
affecting to dip into a large book that lay on the table, upset it with
a great crash, and falling back in his chair, discharged from his
features every expression but one of unmitigated wonder, and indulged
in a prolonged and vacant stare; then, as if ashamed of having betrayed
so much emotion, he jerked himself, as it were, by a convulsion into
his former attitude, and looking out straight before him emitted a long
deep whistle, which seemed, at last, not to be discharged on empty air,
but to die away in the innermost recesses of his stomach.

Mr. Browlow was no less surprised, although his astonishment was not
expressed in the same eccentric manner.  He drew his chair nearer to
Miss Maylie's, and said,

'Do me the favour, my dear young lady, to leave entirely out of the
question that goodness and benevolence of which you speak, and of which
nobody else knows anything; and if you have it in your power to produce
any evidence which will alter the unfavourable opinion I was once
induced to entertain of that poor child, in Heaven's name put me in
possession of it.'

'A bad one!  I'll eat my head if he is not a bad one,' growled Mr.
Grimwig, speaking by some ventriloquial power, without moving a muscle
of his face.

'He is a child of a noble nature and a warm heart,' said Rose,
colouring; 'and that Power which has thought fit to try him beyond his
years, has planted in his breast affections and feelings which would do
honour to many who have numbered his days six times over.'

'I'm only sixty-one,' said Mr. Grimwig, with the same rigid face. 'And,
as the devil's in it if this Oliver is not twelve years old at least, I
don't see the application of that remark.'

'Do not heed my friend, Miss Maylie,' said Mr. Brownlow; 'he does not
mean what he says.'

'Yes, he does,' growled Mr. Grimwig.

'No, he does not,' said Mr. Brownlow, obviously rising in wrath as he
spoke.

'He'll eat his head, if he doesn't,' growled Mr. Grimwig.

'He would deserve to have it knocked off, if he does,' said Mr.
Brownlow.

'And he'd uncommonly like to see any man offer to do it,' responded Mr.
Grimwig, knocking his stick upon the floor.

Having gone thus far, the two old gentlemen severally took snuff, and
afterwards shook hands, according to their invariable custom.

'Now, Miss Maylie,' said Mr. Brownlow, 'to return to the subject in
which your humanity is so much interested.  Will you let me know what
intelligence you have of this poor child:  allowing me to promise that
I exhausted every means in my power of discovering him, and that since
I have been absent from this country, my first impression that he had
imposed upon me, and had been persuaded by his former associates to rob
me, has been considerably shaken.'

Rose, who had had time to collect her thoughts, at once related, in a
few natural words, all that had befallen Oliver since he left Mr.
Brownlow's house; reserving Nancy's information for that gentleman's
private ear, and concluding with the assurance that his only sorrow,
for some months past, had been not being able to meet with his former
benefactor and friend.

'Thank God!' said the old gentleman.  'This is great happiness to me,
great happiness.  But you have not told me where he is now, Miss
Maylie.  You must pardon my finding fault with you,--but why not have
brought him?'

'He is waiting in a coach at the door,' replied Rose.

'At this door!' cried the old gentleman.  With which he hurried out of
the room, down the stairs, up the coachsteps, and into the coach,
without another word.

When the room-door closed behind him, Mr. Grimwig lifted up his head,
and converting one of the hind legs of his chair into a pivot,
described three distinct circles with the assistance of his stick and
the table; sitting in it all the time.  After performing this
evolution, he rose and limped as fast as he could up and down the room
at least a dozen times, and then stopping suddenly before Rose, kissed
her without the slightest preface.

'Hush!' he said, as the young lady rose in some alarm at this unusual
proceeding.  'Don't be afraid.  I'm old enough to be your grandfather.
You're a sweet girl.  I like you.  Here they are!'

In fact, as he threw himself at one dexterous dive into his former
seat, Mr. Brownlow returned, accompanied by Oliver, whom Mr. Grimwig
received very graciously; and if the gratification of that moment had
been the only reward for all her anxiety and care in Oliver's behalf,
Rose Maylie would have been well repaid.

'There is somebody else who should not be forgotten, by the bye,' said
Mr. Brownlow, ringing the bell.  'Send Mrs. Bedwin here, if you please.'

The old housekeeper answered the summons with all dispatch; and
dropping a curtsey at the door, waited for orders.

'Why, you get blinder every day, Bedwin,' said Mr. Brownlow, rather
testily.

'Well, that I do, sir,' replied the old lady.  'People's eyes, at my
time of life, don't improve with age, sir.'

'I could have told you that,' rejoined Mr. Brownlow; 'but put on your
glasses, and see if you can't find out what you were wanted for, will
you?'

The old lady began to rummage in her pocket for her spectacles. But
Oliver's patience was not proof against this new trial; and yielding to
his first impulse, he sprang into her arms.

'God be good to me!' cried the old lady, embracing him; 'it is my
innocent boy!'

'My dear old nurse!' cried Oliver.

'He would come back--I knew he would,' said the old lady, holding him
in her arms.  'How well he looks, and how like a gentleman's son he is
dressed again!  Where have you been, this long, long while?  Ah! the
same sweet face, but not so pale; the same soft eye, but not so sad.  I
have never forgotten them or his quiet smile, but have seen them every
day, side by side with those of my own dear children, dead and gone
since I was a lightsome young creature.'  Running on thus, and now
holding Oliver from her to mark how he had grown, now clasping him to
her and passing her fingers fondly through his hair, the good soul
laughed and wept upon his neck by turns.

Leaving her and Oliver to compare notes at leisure, Mr. Brownlow led
the way into another room; and there, heard from Rose a full narration
of her interview with Nancy, which occasioned him no little surprise
and perplexity.  Rose also explained her reasons for not confiding in
her friend Mr. Losberne in the first instance.  The old gentleman
considered that she had acted prudently, and readily undertook to hold
solemn conference with the worthy doctor himself.  To afford him an
early opportunity for the execution of this design, it was arranged
that he should call at the hotel at eight o'clock that evening, and
that in the meantime Mrs. Maylie should be cautiously informed of all
that had occurred.  These preliminaries adjusted, Rose and Oliver
returned home.

Rose had by no means overrated the measure of the good doctor's wrath.
Nancy's history was no sooner unfolded to him, than he poured forth a
shower of mingled threats and execrations; threatened to make her the
first victim of the combined ingenuity of Messrs. Blathers and Duff;
and actually put on his hat preparatory to sallying forth to obtain the
assistance of those worthies.  And, doubtless, he would, in this first
outbreak, have carried the intention into effect without a moment's
consideration of the consequences, if he had not been restrained, in
part, by corresponding violence on the side of Mr. Brownlow, who was
himself of an irascible temperament, and party by such arguments and
representations as seemed best calculated to dissuade him from his
hotbrained purpose.

'Then what the devil is to be done?' said the impetuous doctor, when
they had rejoined the two ladies.  'Are we to pass a vote of thanks to
all these vagabonds, male and female, and beg them to accept a hundred
pounds, or so, apiece, as a trifling mark of our esteem, and some
slight acknowledgment of their kindness to Oliver?'

'Not exactly that,' rejoined Mr. Brownlow, laughing; 'but we must
proceed gently and with great care.'

'Gentleness and care,' exclaimed the doctor.  'I'd send them one and
all to--'

'Never mind where,' interposed Mr. Brownlow.  'But reflect whether
sending them anywhere is likely to attain the object we have in view.'

'What object?' asked the doctor.

'Simply, the discovery of Oliver's parentage, and regaining for him the
inheritance of which, if this story be true, he has been fraudulently
deprived.'

'Ah!' said Mr. Losberne, cooling himself with his pocket-handkerchief;
'I almost forgot that.'

'You see,' pursued Mr. Brownlow; 'placing this poor girl entirely out
of the question, and supposing it were possible to bring these
scoundrels to justice without compromising her safety, what good should
we bring about?'

'Hanging a few of them at least, in all probability,' suggested the
doctor, 'and transporting the rest.'

'Very good,' replied Mr. Brownlow, smiling; 'but no doubt they will
bring that about for themselves in the fulness of time, and if we step
in to forestall them, it seems to me that we shall be performing a very
Quixotic act, in direct opposition to our own interest--or at least to
Oliver's, which is the same thing.'

'How?' inquired the doctor.

'Thus.  It is quite clear that we shall have extreme difficulty in
getting to the bottom of this mystery, unless we can bring this man,
Monks, upon his knees.  That can only be done by stratagem, and by
catching him when he is not surrounded by these people.  For, suppose
he were apprehended, we have no proof against him.  He is not even (so
far as we know, or as the facts appear to us) concerned with the gang
in any of their robberies. If he were not discharged, it is very
unlikely that he could receive any further punishment than being
committed to prison as a rogue and vagabond; and of course ever
afterwards his mouth would be so obstinately closed that he might as
well, for our purposes, be deaf, dumb, blind, and an idiot.'

'Then,' said the doctor impetuously, 'I put it to you again, whether
you think it reasonable that this promise to the girl should be
considered binding; a promise made with the best and kindest
intentions, but really--'

'Do not discuss the point, my dear young lady, pray,' said Mr.
Brownlow, interrupting Rose as she was about to speak. 'The promise
shall be kept.  I don't think it will, in the slightest degree,
interfere with our proceedings.  But, before we can resolve upon any
precise course of action, it will be necessary to see the girl; to
ascertain from her whether she will point out this Monks, on the
understanding that he is to be dealt with by us, and not by the law;
or, if she will not, or cannot do that, to procure from her such an
account of his haunts and description of his person, as will enable us
to identify him.  She cannot be seen until next Sunday night; this is
Tuesday.  I would suggest that in the meantime, we remain perfectly
quiet, and keep these matters secret even from Oliver himself.'

Although Mr. Losberne received with many wry faces a proposal involving
a delay of five whole days, he was fain to admit that no better course
occurred to him just then; and as both Rose and Mrs. Maylie sided very
strongly with Mr. Brownlow, that gentleman's proposition was carried
unanimously.

'I should like,' he said, 'to call in the aid of my friend Grimwig.  He
is a strange creature, but a shrewd one, and might prove of material
assistance to us; I should say that he was bred a lawyer, and quitted
the Bar in disgust because he had only one brief and a motion of
course, in twenty years, though whether that is recommendation or not,
you must determine for yourselves.'

'I have no objection to your calling in your friend if I may call in
mine,' said the doctor.

'We must put it to the vote,' replied Mr. Brownlow, 'who may he be?'

'That lady's son, and this young lady's--very old friend,' said the
doctor, motioning towards Mrs. Maylie, and concluding with an
expressive glance at her niece.

Rose blushed deeply, but she did not make any audible objection to this
motion (possibly she felt in a hopeless minority); and Harry Maylie and
Mr. Grimwig were accordingly added to the committee.

'We stay in town, of course,' said Mrs. Maylie, 'while there remains
the slightest prospect of prosecuting this inquiry with a chance of
success.  I will spare neither trouble nor expense in behalf of the
object in which we are all so deeply interested, and I am content to
remain here, if it be for twelve months, so long as you assure me that
any hope remains.'

'Good!' rejoined Mr. Brownlow.  'And as I see on the faces about me, a
disposition to inquire how it happened that I was not in the way to
corroborate Oliver's tale, and had so suddenly left the kingdom, let me
stipulate that I shall be asked no questions until such time as I may
deem it expedient to forestall them by telling my own story.  Believe
me, I make this request with good reason, for I might otherwise excite
hopes destined never to be realised, and only increase difficulties and
disappointments already quite numerous enough.  Come!  Supper has been
announced, and young Oliver, who is all alone in the next room, will
have begun to think, by this time, that we have wearied of his company,
and entered into some dark conspiracy to thrust him forth upon the
world.'

With these words, the old gentleman gave his hand to Mrs. Maylie, and
escorted her into the supper-room.  Mr. Losberne followed, leading
Rose; and the council was, for the present, effectually broken up.



CHAPTER XLII

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE OF OLIVER'S, EXHIBITING DECIDED MARKS OF GENIUS,
BECOMES A PUBLIC CHARACTER IN THE METROPOLIS

Upon the night when Nancy, having lulled Mr. Sikes to sleep, hurried on
her self-imposed mission to Rose Maylie, there advanced towards London,
by the Great North Road, two persons, upon whom it is expedient that
this history should bestow some attention.

They were a man and woman; or perhaps they would be better described as
a male and female:  for the former was one of those long-limbed,
knock-kneed, shambling, bony people, to whom it is difficult to assign
any precise age,--looking as they do, when they are yet boys, like
undergrown men, and when they are almost men, like overgrown boys.  The
woman was young, but of a robust and hardy make, as she need have been
to bear the weight of the heavy bundle which was strapped to her back.
Her companion was not encumbered with much luggage, as there merely
dangled from a stick which he carried over his shoulder, a small parcel
wrapped in a common handkerchief, and apparently light enough.  This
circumstance, added to the length of his legs, which were of unusual
extent, enabled him with much ease to keep some half-dozen paces in
advance of his companion, to whom he occasionally turned with an
impatient jerk of the head:  as if reproaching her tardiness, and
urging her to greater exertion.

Thus, they had toiled along the dusty road, taking little heed of any
object within sight, save when they stepped aside to allow a wider
passage for the mail-coaches which were whirling out of town, until
they passed through Highgate archway; when the foremost traveller
stopped and called impatiently to his companion,

'Come on, can't yer?  What a lazybones yer are, Charlotte.'

'It's a heavy load, I can tell you,' said the female, coming up, almost
breathless with fatigue.

'Heavy!  What are yer talking about?  What are yer made for?' rejoined
the male traveller, changing his own little bundle as he spoke, to the
other shoulder.  'Oh, there yer are, resting again! Well, if yer ain't
enough to tire anybody's patience out, I don't know what is!'

'Is it much farther?' asked the woman, resting herself against a bank,
and looking up with the perspiration streaming from her face.

'Much farther!  Yer as good as there,' said the long-legged tramper,
pointing out before him.  'Look there!  Those are the lights of London.'

'They're a good two mile off, at least,' said the woman despondingly.

'Never mind whether they're two mile off, or twenty,' said Noah
Claypole; for he it was; 'but get up and come on, or I'll kick yer, and
so I give yer notice.'

As Noah's red nose grew redder with anger, and as he crossed the road
while speaking, as if fully prepared to put his threat into execution,
the woman rose without any further remark, and trudged onward by his
side.

'Where do you mean to stop for the night, Noah?' she asked, after they
had walked a few hundred yards.

'How should I know?' replied Noah, whose temper had been considerably
impaired by walking.

'Near, I hope,' said Charlotte.

'No, not near,' replied Mr. Claypole.  'There!  Not near; so don't
think it.'

'Why not?'

'When I tell yer that I don't mean to do a thing, that's enough,
without any why or because either,' replied Mr. Claypole with dignity.

'Well, you needn't be so cross,' said his companion.

'A pretty thing it would be, wouldn't it to go and stop at the very
first public-house outside the town, so that Sowerberry, if he come up
after us, might poke in his old nose, and have us taken back in a cart
with handcuffs on,' said Mr. Claypole in a jeering tone.  'No!  I shall
go and lose myself among the narrowest streets I can find, and not stop
till we come to the very out-of-the-wayest house I can set eyes on.
'Cod, yer may thanks yer stars I've got a head; for if we hadn't gone,
at first, the wrong road a purpose, and come back across country, yer'd
have been locked up hard and fast a week ago, my lady.  And serve yer
right for being a fool.'

'I know I ain't as cunning as you are,' replied Charlotte; 'but don't
put all the blame on me, and say I should have been locked up.  You
would have been if I had been, any way.'

'Yer took the money from the till, yer know yer did,' said Mr. Claypole.

'I took it for you, Noah, dear,' rejoined Charlotte.

'Did I keep it?' asked Mr. Claypole.

'No; you trusted in me, and let me carry it like a dear, and so you
are,' said the lady, chucking him under the chin, and drawing her arm
through his.

This was indeed the case; but as it was not Mr. Claypole's habit to
repose a blind and foolish confidence in anybody, it should be
observed, in justice to that gentleman, that he had trusted Charlotte
to this extent, in order that, if they were pursued, the money might be
found on her:  which would leave him an opportunity of asserting his
innocence of any theft, and would greatly facilitate his chances of
escape.  Of course, he entered at this juncture, into no explanation of
his motives, and they walked on very lovingly together.

In pursuance of this cautious plan, Mr. Claypole went on, without
halting, until he arrived at the Angel at Islington, where he wisely
judged, from the crowd of passengers and numbers of vehicles, that
London began in earnest.  Just pausing to observe which appeared the
most crowded streets, and consequently the most to be avoided, he
crossed into Saint John's Road, and was soon deep in the obscurity of
the intricate and dirty ways, which, lying between Gray's Inn Lane and
Smithfield, render that part of the town one of the lowest and worst
that improvement has left in the midst of London.

Through these streets, Noah Claypole walked, dragging Charlotte after
him; now stepping into the kennel to embrace at a glance the whole
external character of some small public-house; now jogging on again, as
some fancied appearance induced him to believe it too public for his
purpose.  At length, he stopped in front of one, more humble in
appearance and more dirty than any he had yet seen; and, having crossed
over and surveyed it from the opposite pavement, graciously announced
his intention of putting up there, for the night.

'So give us the bundle,' said Noah, unstrapping it from the woman's
shoulders, and slinging it over his own; 'and don't yer speak, except
when yer spoke to.  What's the name of the house--t-h-r--three what?'

'Cripples,' said Charlotte.

'Three Cripples,' repeated Noah, 'and a very good sign too.  Now, then!
Keep close at my heels, and come along.'  With these injunctions, he
pushed the rattling door with his shoulder, and entered the house,
followed by his companion.

There was nobody in the bar but a young Jew, who, with his two elbows
on the counter, was reading a dirty newspaper. He stared very hard at
Noah, and Noah stared very hard at him.

If Noah had been attired in his charity-boy's dress, there might have
been some reason for the Jew opening his eyes so wide; but as he had
discarded the coat and badge, and wore a short smock-frock over his
leathers, there seemed no particular reason for his appearance exciting
so much attention in a public-house.

'Is this the Three Cripples?' asked Noah.

'That is the dabe of this 'ouse,' replied the Jew.

'A gentleman we met on the road, coming up from the country,
recommended us here,' said Noah, nudging Charlotte, perhaps to call her
attention to this most ingenious device for attracting respect, and
perhaps to warn her to betray no surprise.  'We want to sleep here
to-night.'

'I'b dot certaid you cad,' said Barney, who was the attendant sprite;
'but I'll idquire.'

'Show us the tap, and give us a bit of cold meat and a drop of beer
while yer inquiring, will yer?' said Noah.

Barney complied by ushering them into a small back-room, and setting
the required viands before them; having done which, he informed the
travellers that they could be lodged that night, and left the amiable
couple to their refreshment.

Now, this back-room was immediately behind the bar, and some steps
lower, so that any person connected with the house, undrawing a small
curtain which concealed a single pane of glass fixed in the wall of the
last-named apartment, about five feet from its flooring, could not only
look down upon any guests in the back-room without any great hazard of
being observed (the glass being in a dark angle of the wall, between
which and a large upright beam the observer had to thrust himself), but
could, by applying his ear to the partition, ascertain with tolerable
distinctness, their subject of conversation.  The landlord of the house
had not withdrawn his eye from this place of espial for five minutes,
and Barney had only just returned from making the communication above
related, when Fagin, in the course of his evening's business, came into
the bar to inquire after some of his young pupils.

'Hush!' said Barney:  'stradegers id the next roob.'

'Strangers!' repeated the old man in a whisper.

'Ah!  Ad rub uds too,' added Barney.  'Frob the cuttry, but subthig in
your way, or I'b bistaked.'

Fagin appeared to receive this communication with great interest.

Mounting a stool, he cautiously applied his eye to the pane of glass,
from which secret post he could see Mr. Claypole taking cold beef from
the dish, and porter from the pot, and administering homeopathic doses
of both to Charlotte, who sat patiently by, eating and drinking at his
pleasure.

'Aha!' he whispered, looking round to Barney, 'I like that fellow's
looks.  He'd be of use to us; he knows how to train the girl already.
Don't make as much noise as a mouse, my dear, and let me hear 'em
talk--let me hear 'em.'

He again applied his eye to the glass, and turning his ear to the
partition, listened attentively:  with a subtle and eager look upon his
face, that might have appertained to some old goblin.

'So I mean to be a gentleman,' said Mr. Claypole, kicking out his legs,
and continuing a conversation, the commencement of which Fagin had
arrived too late to hear. 'No more jolly old coffins, Charlotte, but a
gentleman's life for me:  and, if yer like, yer shall be a lady.'

'I should like that well enough, dear,' replied Charlotte; 'but tills
ain't to be emptied every day, and people to get clear off after it.'

'Tills be blowed!' said Mr. Claypole; 'there's more things besides
tills to be emptied.'

'What do you mean?' asked his companion.

'Pockets, women's ridicules, houses, mail-coaches, banks!' said Mr.
Claypole, rising with the porter.

'But you can't do all that, dear,' said Charlotte.

'I shall look out to get into company with them as can,' replied Noah.
'They'll be able to make us useful some way or another. Why, you
yourself are worth fifty women; I never see such a precious sly and
deceitful creetur as yer can be when I let yer.'

'Lor, how nice it is to hear yer say so!' exclaimed Charlotte,
imprinting a kiss upon his ugly face.

'There, that'll do:  don't yer be too affectionate, in case I'm cross
with yer,' said Noah, disengaging himself with great gravity.  'I
should like to be the captain of some band, and have the whopping of
'em, and follering 'em about, unbeknown to themselves.  That would suit
me, if there was good profit; and if we could only get in with some
gentleman of this sort, I say it would be cheap at that twenty-pound
note you've got,--especially as we don't very well know how to get rid
of it ourselves.'

After expressing this opinion, Mr. Claypole looked into the porter-pot
with an aspect of deep wisdom; and having well shaken its contents,
nodded condescendingly to Charlotte, and took a draught, wherewith he
appeared greatly refreshed.  He was meditating another, when the sudden
opening of the door, and the appearance of a stranger, interrupted him.

The stranger was Mr. Fagin.  And very amiable he looked, and a very low
bow he made, as he advanced, and setting himself down at the nearest
table, ordered something to drink of the grinning Barney.

'A pleasant night, sir, but cool for the time of year,' said Fagin,
rubbing his hands.  'From the country, I see, sir?'

'How do yer see that?' asked Noah Claypole.

'We have not so much dust as that in London,' replied Fagin, pointing
from Noah's shoes to those of his companion, and from them to the two
bundles.

'Yer a sharp feller,' said Noah.  'Ha! ha! only hear that, Charlotte!'

'Why, one need be sharp in this town, my dear,' replied the Jew,
sinking his voice to a confidential whisper; 'and that's the truth.'

Fagin followed up this remark by striking the side of his nose with his
right forefinger,--a gesture which Noah attempted to imitate, though
not with complete success, in consequence of his own nose not being
large enough for the purpose.  However, Mr. Fagin seemed to interpret
the endeavour as expressing a perfect coincidence with his opinion, and
put about the liquor which Barney reappeared with, in a very friendly
manner.

'Good stuff that,' observed Mr. Claypole, smacking his lips.

'Dear!' said Fagin.  'A man need be always emptying a till, or a
pocket, or a woman's reticule, or a house, or a mail-coach, or a bank,
if he drinks it regularly.'

Mr. Claypole no sooner heard this extract from his own remarks than he
fell back in his chair, and looked from the Jew to Charlotte with a
countenance of ashy paleness and excessive terror.

'Don't mind me, my dear,' said Fagin, drawing his chair closer. 'Ha!
ha! it was lucky it was only me that heard you by chance. It was very
lucky it was only me.'

'I didn't take it,' stammered Noah, no longer stretching out his legs
like an independent gentleman, but coiling them up as well as he could
under his chair; 'it was all her doing; yer've got it now, Charlotte,
yer know yer have.'

'No matter who's got it, or who did it, my dear,' replied Fagin,
glancing, nevertheless, with a hawk's eye at the girl and the two
bundles.  'I'm in that way myself, and I like you for it.'

'In what way?' asked Mr. Claypole, a little recovering.

'In that way of business,' rejoined Fagin; 'and so are the people of
the house.  You've hit the right nail upon the head, and are as safe
here as you could be.  There is not a safer place in all this town than
is the Cripples; that is, when I like to make it so.  And I have taken
a fancy to you and the young woman; so I've said the word, and you may
make your minds easy.'

Noah Claypole's mind might have been at ease after this assurance, but
his body certainly was not; for he shuffled and writhed about, into
various uncouth positions:  eyeing his new friend meanwhile with
mingled fear and suspicion.

'I'll tell you more,' said Fagin, after he had reassured the girl, by
dint of friendly nods and muttered encouragements. 'I have got a friend
that I think can gratify your darling wish, and put you in the right
way, where you can take whatever department of the business you think
will suit you best at first, and be taught all the others.'

'Yer speak as if yer were in earnest,' replied Noah.

'What advantage would it be to me to be anything else?' inquired Fagin,
shrugging his shoulders.  'Here!  Let me have a word with you outside.'

'There's no occasion to trouble ourselves to move,' said Noah, getting
his legs by gradual degrees abroad again. 'She'll take the luggage
upstairs the while.  Charlotte, see to them bundles.'

This mandate, which had been delivered with great majesty, was obeyed
without the slightest demur; and Charlotte made the best of her way off
with the packages while Noah held the door open and watched her out.

'She's kept tolerably well under, ain't she?' he asked as he resumed
his seat:  in the tone of a keeper who had tamed some wild animal.

'Quite perfect,' rejoined Fagin, clapping him on the shoulder. 'You're
a genius, my dear.'

'Why, I suppose if I wasn't, I shouldn't be here,' replied Noah. 'But,
I say, she'll be back if yer lose time.'

'Now, what do you think?' said Fagin.  'If you was to like my friend,
could you do better than join him?'

'Is he in a good way of business; that's where it is!' responded Noah,
winking one of his little eyes.

'The top of the tree; employs a power of hands; has the very best
society in the profession.'

'Regular town-maders?' asked Mr. Claypole.

'Not a countryman among 'em; and I don't think he'd take you, even on
my recommendation, if he didn't run rather short of assistants just
now,' replied Fagin.

'Should I have to hand over?' said Noah, slapping his breeches-pocket.

'It couldn't possibly be done without,' replied Fagin, in a most
decided manner.

'Twenty pound, though--it's a lot of money!'

'Not when it's in a note you can't get rid of,' retorted Fagin. 'Number
and date taken, I suppose?  Payment stopped at the Bank? Ah!  It's not
worth much to him.  It'll have to go abroad, and he couldn't sell it
for a great deal in the market.'

'When could I see him?' asked Noah doubtfully.

'To-morrow morning.'

'Where?'

'Here.'

'Um!' said Noah.  'What's the wages?'

'Live like a gentleman--board and lodging, pipes and spirits free--half
of all you earn, and half of all the young woman earns,' replied Mr.
Fagin.

Whether Noah Claypole, whose rapacity was none of the least
comprehensive, would have acceded even to these glowing terms, had he
been a perfectly free agent, is very doubtful; but as he recollected
that, in the event of his refusal, it was in the power of his new
acquaintance to give him up to justice immediately (and more unlikely
things had come to pass), he gradually relented, and said he thought
that would suit him.

'But, yer see,' observed Noah, 'as she will be able to do a good deal,
I should like to take something very light.'

'A little fancy work?' suggested Fagin.

'Ah! something of that sort,' replied Noah.  'What do you think would
suit me now?  Something not too trying for the strength, and not very
dangerous, you know.  That's the sort of thing!'

'I heard you talk of something in the spy way upon the others, my
dear,' said Fagin.  'My friend wants somebody who would do that well,
very much.'

'Why, I did mention that, and I shouldn't mind turning my hand to it
sometimes,' rejoined Mr. Claypole slowly; 'but it wouldn't pay by
itself, you know.'

'That's true!' observed the Jew, ruminating or pretending to ruminate.
'No, it might not.'

'What do you think, then?' asked Noah, anxiously regarding him.
'Something in the sneaking way, where it was pretty sure work, and not
much more risk than being at home.'

'What do you think of the old ladies?' asked Fagin. 'There's a good
deal of money made in snatching their bags and parcels, and running
round the corner.'

'Don't they holler out a good deal, and scratch sometimes?' asked Noah,
shaking his head.  'I don't think that would answer my purpose.  Ain't
there any other line open?'

'Stop!' said Fagin, laying his hand on Noah's knee.  'The kinchin lay.'

'What's that?' demanded Mr. Claypole.

'The kinchins, my dear,' said Fagin, 'is the young children that's sent
on errands by their mothers, with sixpences and shillings; and the lay
is just to take their money away--they've always got it ready in their
hands,--then knock 'em into the kennel, and walk off very slow, as if
there were nothing else the matter but a child fallen down and hurt
itself.  Ha! ha! ha!'

'Ha! ha!' roared Mr. Claypole, kicking up his legs in an ecstasy.
'Lord, that's the very thing!'

'To be sure it is,' replied Fagin; 'and you can have a few good beats
chalked out in Camden Town, and Battle Bridge, and neighborhoods like
that, where they're always going errands; and you can upset as many
kinchins as you want, any hour in the day. Ha! ha! ha!'

With this, Fagin poked Mr. Claypole in the side, and they joined in a
burst of laughter both long and loud.

'Well, that's all right!' said Noah, when he had recovered himself, and
Charlotte had returned.  'What time to-morrow shall we say?'

'Will ten do?' asked Fagin, adding, as Mr. Claypole nodded assent,
'What name shall I tell my good friend.'

'Mr. Bolter,' replied Noah, who had prepared himself for such
emergency.  'Mr. Morris Bolter.  This is Mrs. Bolter.'

'Mrs. Bolter's humble servant,' said Fagin, bowing with grotesque
politeness.  'I hope I shall know her better very shortly.'

'Do you hear the gentleman, Charlotte?' thundered Mr. Claypole.

'Yes, Noah, dear!' replied Mrs. Bolter, extending her hand.

'She calls me Noah, as a sort of fond way of talking,' said Mr. Morris
Bolter, late Claypole, turning to Fagin.  'You understand?'

'Oh yes, I understand--perfectly,' replied Fagin, telling the truth for
once.  'Good-night!  Good-night!'

With many adieus and good wishes, Mr. Fagin went his way. Noah
Claypole, bespeaking his good lady's attention, proceeded to enlighten
her relative to the arrangement he had made, with all that haughtiness
and air of superiority, becoming, not only a member of the sterner sex,
but a gentleman who appreciated the dignity of a special appointment on
the kinchin lay, in London and its vicinity.



CHAPTER XLIII

WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW THE ARTFUL DODGER GOT INTO TROUBLE

'And so it was you that was your own friend, was it?' asked Mr.
Claypole, otherwise Bolter, when, by virtue of the compact entered into
between them, he had removed next day to Fagin's house.  ''Cod, I
thought as much last night!'

'Every man's his own friend, my dear,' replied Fagin, with his most
insinuating grin.  'He hasn't as good a one as himself anywhere.'

'Except sometimes,' replied Morris Bolter, assuming the air of a man of
the world.  'Some people are nobody's enemies but their own, yer know.'

'Don't believe that,' said Fagin.  'When a man's his own enemy, it's
only because he's too much his own friend; not because he's careful for
everybody but himself.  Pooh! pooh!  There ain't such a thing in
nature.'

'There oughn't to be, if there is,' replied Mr. Bolter.

'That stands to reason.  Some conjurers say that number three is the
magic number, and some say number seven.  It's neither, my friend,
neither.  It's number one.

'Ha! ha!' cried Mr. Bolter.  'Number one for ever.'

'In a little community like ours, my dear,' said Fagin, who felt it
necessary to qualify this position, 'we have a general number one,
without considering me too as the same, and all the other young people.'

'Oh, the devil!' exclaimed Mr. Bolter.

'You see,' pursued Fagin, affecting to disregard this interruption, 'we
are so mixed up together, and identified in our interests, that it must
be so.  For instance, it's your object to take care of number
one--meaning yourself.'

'Certainly,' replied Mr. Bolter.  'Yer about right there.'

'Well!  You can't take care of yourself, number one, without taking
care of me, number one.'

'Number two, you mean,' said Mr. Bolter, who was largely endowed with
the quality of selfishness.

'No, I don't!' retorted Fagin.  'I'm of the same importance to you, as
you are to yourself.'

'I say,' interrupted Mr. Bolter, 'yer a very nice man, and I'm very
fond of yer; but we ain't quite so thick together, as all that comes
to.'

'Only think,' said Fagin, shrugging his shoulders, and stretching out
his hands; 'only consider.  You've done what's a very pretty thing, and
what I love you for doing; but what at the same time would put the
cravat round your throat, that's so very easily tied and so very
difficult to unloose--in plain English, the halter!'

Mr. Bolter put his hand to his neckerchief, as if he felt it
inconveniently tight; and murmured an assent, qualified in tone but not
in substance.

'The gallows,' continued Fagin, 'the gallows, my dear, is an ugly
finger-post, which points out a very short and sharp turning that has
stopped many a bold fellow's career on the broad highway.  To keep in
the easy road, and keep it at a distance, is object number one with
you.'

'Of course it is,' replied Mr. Bolter.  'What do yer talk about such
things for?'

'Only to show you my meaning clearly,' said the Jew, raising his
eyebrows.  'To be able to do that, you depend upon me. To keep my
little business all snug, I depend upon you. The first is your number
one, the second my number one.  The more you value your number one, the
more careful you must be of mine; so we come at last to what I told you
at first--that a regard for number one holds us all together, and must
do so, unless we would all go to pieces in company.'

'That's true,' rejoined Mr. Bolter, thoughtfully.  'Oh! yer a cunning
old codger!'

Mr. Fagin saw, with delight, that this tribute to his powers was no
mere compliment, but that he had really impressed his recruit with a
sense of his wily genius, which it was most important that he should
entertain in the outset of their acquaintance.  To strengthen an
impression so desirable and useful, he followed up the blow by
acquainting him, in some detail, with the magnitude and extent of his
operations; blending truth and fiction together, as best served his
purpose; and bringing both to bear, with so much art, that Mr. Bolter's
respect visibly increased, and became tempered, at the same time, with
a degree of wholesome fear, which it was highly desirable to awaken.

'It's this mutual trust we have in each other that consoles me under
heavy losses,' said Fagin.  'My best hand was taken from me, yesterday
morning.'

'You don't mean to say he died?' cried Mr. Bolter.

'No, no,' replied Fagin, 'not so bad as that.  Not quite so bad.'

'What, I suppose he was--'

'Wanted,' interposed Fagin.  'Yes, he was wanted.'

'Very particular?' inquired Mr. Bolter.

'No,' replied Fagin, 'not very.  He was charged with attempting to pick
a pocket, and they found a silver snuff-box on him,--his own, my dear,
his own, for he took snuff himself, and was very fond of it.  They
remanded him till to-day, for they thought they knew the owner.  Ah! he
was worth fifty boxes, and I'd give the price of as many to have him
back.  You should have known the Dodger, my dear; you should have known
the Dodger.'

'Well, but I shall know him, I hope; don't yer think so?' said Mr.
Bolter.

'I'm doubtful about it,' replied Fagin, with a sigh.  'If they don't
get any fresh evidence, it'll only be a summary conviction, and we
shall have him back again after six weeks or so; but, if they do, it's
a case of lagging.  They know what a clever lad he is; he'll be a
lifer.  They'll make the Artful nothing less than a lifer.'

'What do you mean by lagging and a lifer?' demanded Mr. Bolter. 'What's
the good of talking in that way to me; why don't yer speak so as I can
understand yer?'

Fagin was about to translate these mysterious expressions into the
vulgar tongue; and, being interpreted, Mr. Bolter would have been
informed that they represented that combination of words,
'transportation for life,' when the dialogue was cut short by the entry
of Master Bates, with his hands in his breeches-pockets, and his face
twisted into a look of semi-comical woe.

'It's all up, Fagin,' said Charley, when he and his new companion had
been made known to each other.

'What do you mean?'

'They've found the gentleman as owns the box; two or three more's a
coming to 'dentify him; and the Artful's booked for a passage out,'
replied Master Bates.  'I must have a full suit of mourning, Fagin, and
a hatband, to wisit him in, afore he sets out upon his travels.  To
think of Jack Dawkins--lummy Jack--the Dodger--the Artful Dodger--going
abroad for a common twopenny-halfpenny sneeze-box!  I never thought
he'd a done it under a gold watch, chain, and seals, at the lowest.
Oh, why didn't he rob some rich old gentleman of all his walables, and
go out as a gentleman, and not like a common prig, without no honour
nor glory!'

With this expression of feeling for his unfortunate friend, Master
Bates sat himself on the nearest chair with an aspect of chagrin and
despondency.

'What do you talk about his having neither honour nor glory for!'
exclaimed Fagin, darting an angry look at his pupil. 'Wasn't he always
the top-sawyer among you all!  Is there one of you that could touch him
or come near him on any scent!  Eh?'

'Not one,' replied Master Bates, in a voice rendered husky by regret;
'not one.'

'Then what do you talk of?' replied Fagin angrily; 'what are you
blubbering for?'

''Cause it isn't on the rec-ord, is it?' said Charley, chafed into
perfect defiance of his venerable friend by the current of his regrets;
''cause it can't come out in the 'dictment; 'cause nobody will never
know half of what he was.  How will he stand in the Newgate Calendar?
P'raps not be there at all.  Oh, my eye, my eye, wot a blow it is!'

'Ha! ha!' cried Fagin, extending his right hand, and turning to Mr.
Bolter in a fit of chuckling which shook him as though he had the
palsy; 'see what a pride they take in their profession, my dear.  Ain't
it beautiful?'

Mr. Bolter nodded assent, and Fagin, after contemplating the grief of
Charley Bates for some seconds with evident satisfaction, stepped up to
that young gentleman and patted him on the shoulder.

'Never mind, Charley,' said Fagin soothingly; 'it'll come out, it'll be
sure to come out.  They'll all know what a clever fellow he was; he'll
show it himself, and not disgrace his old pals and teachers.  Think how
young he is too!  What a distinction, Charley, to be lagged at his time
of life!'

'Well, it is a honour that is!' said Charley, a little consoled.

'He shall have all he wants,' continued the Jew.  'He shall be kept in
the Stone Jug, Charley, like a gentleman.  Like a gentleman!  With his
beer every day, and money in his pocket to pitch and toss with, if he
can't spend it.'

'No, shall he though?' cried Charley Bates.

'Ay, that he shall,' replied Fagin, 'and we'll have a big-wig, Charley:
one that's got the greatest gift of the gab:  to carry on his defence;
and he shall make a speech for himself too, if he likes; and we'll read
it all in the papers--"Artful Dodger--shrieks of laughter--here the
court was convulsed"--eh, Charley, eh?'

'Ha! ha!' laughed Master Bates, 'what a lark that would be, wouldn't
it, Fagin?  I say, how the Artful would bother 'em wouldn't he?'

'Would!' cried Fagin.  'He shall--he will!'

'Ah, to be sure, so he will,' repeated Charley, rubbing his hands.

'I think I see him now,' cried the Jew, bending his eyes upon his pupil.

'So do I,' cried Charley Bates.  'Ha! ha! ha! so do I.  I see it all
afore me, upon my soul I do, Fagin.  What a game!  What a regular game!
All the big-wigs trying to look solemn, and Jack Dawkins addressing of
'em as intimate and comfortable as if he was the judge's own son making
a speech arter dinner--ha! ha! ha!'

In fact, Mr. Fagin had so well humoured his young friend's eccentric
disposition, that Master Bates, who had at first been disposed to
consider the imprisoned Dodger rather in the light of a victim, now
looked upon him as the chief actor in a scene of most uncommon and
exquisite humour, and felt quite impatient for the arrival of the time
when his old companion should have so favourable an opportunity of
displaying his abilities.

'We must know how he gets on to-day, by some handy means or other,'
said Fagin.  'Let me think.'

'Shall I go?' asked Charley.

'Not for the world,' replied Fagin.  'Are you mad, my dear, stark mad,
that you'd walk into the very place where--No, Charley, no. One is
enough to lose at a time.'

'You don't mean to go yourself, I suppose?' said Charley with a
humorous leer.

'That wouldn't quite fit,' replied Fagin shaking his head.

'Then why don't you send this new cove?' asked Master Bates, laying his
hand on Noah's arm.  'Nobody knows him.'

'Why, if he didn't mind--' observed Fagin.

'Mind!' interposed Charley.  'What should he have to mind?'

'Really nothing, my dear,' said Fagin, turning to Mr. Bolter, 'really
nothing.'

'Oh, I dare say about that, yer know,' observed Noah, backing towards
the door, and shaking his head with a kind of sober alarm.  'No,
no--none of that.  It's not in my department, that ain't.'

'Wot department has he got, Fagin?' inquired Master Bates, surveying
Noah's lank form with much disgust.  'The cutting away when there's
anything wrong, and the eating all the wittles when there's everything
right; is that his branch?'

'Never mind,' retorted Mr. Bolter; 'and don't yer take liberties with
yer superiors, little boy, or yer'll find yerself in the wrong shop.'

Master Bates laughed so vehemently at this magnificent threat, that it
was some time before Fagin could interpose, and represent to Mr. Bolter
that he incurred no possible danger in visiting the police-office;
that, inasmuch as no account of the little affair in which he had
engaged, nor any description of his person, had yet been forwarded to
the metropolis, it was very probable that he was not even suspected of
having resorted to it for shelter; and that, if he were properly
disguised, it would be as safe a spot for him to visit as any in
London, inasmuch as it would be, of all places, the very last, to which
he could be supposed likely to resort of his own free will.

Persuaded, in part, by these representations, but overborne in a much
greater degree by his fear of Fagin, Mr. Bolter at length consented,
with a very bad grace, to undertake the expedition. By Fagin's
directions, he immediately substituted for his own attire, a waggoner's
frock, velveteen breeches, and leather leggings:  all of which articles
the Jew had at hand.  He was likewise furnished with a felt hat well
garnished with turnpike tickets; and a carter's whip.  Thus equipped,
he was to saunter into the office, as some country fellow from Covent
Garden market might be supposed to do for the gratification of his
curiousity; and as he was as awkward, ungainly, and raw-boned a fellow
as need be, Mr. Fagin had no fear but that he would look the part to
perfection.

These arrangements completed, he was informed of the necessary signs
and tokens by which to recognise the Artful Dodger, and was conveyed by
Master Bates through dark and winding ways to within a very short
distance of Bow Street. Having described the precise situation of the
office, and accompanied it with copious directions how he was to walk
straight up the passage, and when he got into the side, and pull off
his hat as he went into the room, Charley Bates bade him hurry on
alone, and promised to bide his return on the spot of their parting.

Noah Claypole, or Morris Bolter as the reader pleases, punctually
followed the directions he had received, which--Master Bates being
pretty well acquainted with the locality--were so exact that he was
enabled to gain the magisterial presence without asking any question,
or meeting with any interruption by the way.

He found himself jostled among a crowd of people, chiefly women, who
were huddled together in a dirty frowsy room, at the upper end of which
was a raised platform railed off from the rest, with a dock for the
prisoners on the left hand against the wall, a box for the witnesses in
the middle, and a desk for the magistrates on the right; the awful
locality last named, being screened off by a partition which concealed
the bench from the common gaze, and left the vulgar to imagine (if they
could) the full majesty of justice.

There were only a couple of women in the dock, who were nodding to
their admiring friends, while the clerk read some depositions to a
couple of policemen and a man in plain clothes who leant over the
table.  A jailer stood reclining against the dock-rail, tapping his
nose listlessly with a large key, except when he repressed an undue
tendency to conversation among the idlers, by proclaiming silence; or
looked sternly up to bid some woman 'Take that baby out,' when the
gravity of justice was disturbed by feeble cries, half-smothered in the
mother's shawl, from some meagre infant.  The room smelt close and
unwholesome; the walls were dirt-discoloured; and the ceiling
blackened.  There was an old smoky bust over the mantel-shelf, and a
dusty clock above the dock--the only thing present, that seemed to go
on as it ought; for depravity, or poverty, or an habitual acquaintance
with both, had left a taint on all the animate matter, hardly less
unpleasant than the thick greasy scum on every inanimate object that
frowned upon it.

Noah looked eagerly about him for the Dodger; but although there were
several women who would have done very well for that distinguished
character's mother or sister, and more than one man who might be
supposed to bear a strong resemblance to his father, nobody at all
answering the description given him of Mr. Dawkins was to be seen.  He
waited in a state of much suspense and uncertainty until the women,
being committed for trial, went flaunting out; and then was quickly
relieved by the appearance of another prisoner who he felt at once
could be no other than the object of his visit.

It was indeed Mr. Dawkins, who, shuffling into the office with the big
coat sleeves tucked up as usual, his left hand in his pocket, and his
hat in his right hand, preceded the jailer, with a rolling gait
altogether indescribable, and, taking his place in the dock, requested
in an audible voice to know what he was placed in that 'ere disgraceful
sitivation for.

'Hold your tongue, will you?' said the jailer.

'I'm an Englishman, ain't I?' rejoined the Dodger.  'Where are my
priwileges?'

'You'll get your privileges soon enough,' retorted the jailer, 'and
pepper with 'em.'

'We'll see wot the Secretary of State for the Home Affairs has got to
say to the beaks, if I don't,' replied Mr. Dawkins.  'Now then!  Wot is
this here business?  I shall thank the madg'strates to dispose of this
here little affair, and not to keep me while they read the paper, for
I've got an appointment with a genelman in the City, and as I am a man
of my word and wery punctual in business matters, he'll go away if I
ain't there to my time, and then pr'aps ther won't be an action for
damage against them as kep me away.  Oh no, certainly not!'

At this point, the Dodger, with a show of being very particular with a
view to proceedings to be had thereafter, desired the jailer to
communicate 'the names of them two files as was on the bench.'  Which
so tickled the spectators, that they laughed almost as heartily as
Master Bates could have done if he had heard the request.

'Silence there!' cried the jailer.

'What is this?' inquired one of the magistrates.

'A pick-pocketing case, your worship.'

'Has the boy ever been here before?'

'He ought to have been, a many times,' replied the jailer. 'He has been
pretty well everywhere else.  _I_ know him well, your worship.'

'Oh! you know me, do you?' cried the Artful, making a note of the
statement.  'Wery good.  That's a case of deformation of character, any
way.'

Here there was another laugh, and another cry of silence.

'Now then, where are the witnesses?' said the clerk.

'Ah! that's right,' added the Dodger.  'Where are they?  I should like
to see 'em.'

This wish was immediately gratified, for a policeman stepped forward
who had seen the prisoner attempt the pocket of an unknown gentleman in
a crowd, and indeed take a handkerchief therefrom, which, being a very
old one, he deliberately put back again, after trying it on his own
countenance.  For this reason, he took the Dodger into custody as soon
as he could get near him, and the said Dodger, being searched, had upon
his person a silver snuff-box, with the owner's name engraved upon the
lid.  This gentleman had been discovered on reference to the Court
Guide, and being then and there present, swore that the snuff-box was
his, and that he had missed it on the previous day, the moment he had
disengaged himself from the crowd before referred to.  He had also
remarked a young gentleman in the throng, particularly active in making
his way about, and that young gentleman was the prisoner before him.

'Have you anything to ask this witness, boy?' said the magistrate.

'I wouldn't abase myself by descending to hold no conversation with
him,' replied the Dodger.

'Have you anything to say at all?'

'Do you hear his worship ask if you've anything to say?' inquired the
jailer, nudging the silent Dodger with his elbow.

'I beg your pardon,' said the Dodger, looking up with an air of
abstraction.  'Did you redress yourself to me, my man?'

'I never see such an out-and-out young wagabond, your worship,'
observed the officer with a grin.  'Do you mean to say anything, you
young shaver?'

'No,' replied the Dodger, 'not here, for this ain't the shop for
justice:  besides which, my attorney is a-breakfasting this morning
with the Wice President of the House of Commons; but I shall have
something to say elsewhere, and so will he, and so will a wery numerous
and 'spectable circle of acquaintance as'll make them beaks wish they'd
never been born, or that they'd got their footmen to hang 'em up to
their own hat-pegs, afore they let 'em come out this morning to try it
on upon me.  I'll--'

'There!  He's fully committed!' interposed the clerk. 'Take him away.'

'Come on,' said the jailer.

'Oh ah!  I'll come on,' replied the Dodger, brushing his hat with the
palm of his hand.  'Ah! (to the Bench) it's no use your looking
frightened; I won't show you no mercy, not a ha'porth of it.  _You'll_
pay for this, my fine fellers.  I wouldn't be you for something!  I
wouldn't go free, now, if you was to fall down on your knees and ask
me.  Here, carry me off to prison!  Take me away!'

With these last words, the Dodger suffered himself to be led off by the
collar; threatening, till he got into the yard, to make a parliamentary
business of it; and then grinning in the officer's face, with great
glee and self-approval.

Having seen him locked up by himself in a little cell, Noah made the
best of his way back to where he had left Master Bates. After waiting
here some time, he was joined by that young gentleman, who had
prudently abstained from showing himself until he had looked carefully
abroad from a snug retreat, and ascertained that his new friend had not
been followed by any impertinent person.

The two hastened back together, to bear to Mr. Fagin the animating news
that the Dodger was doing full justice to his bringing-up, and
establishing for himself a glorious reputation.



CHAPTER XLIV

THE TIME ARRIVES FOR NANCY TO REDEEM HER PLEDGE TO ROSE MAYLIE. SHE
FAILS.

Adept as she was, in all the arts of cunning and dissimulation, the
girl Nancy could not wholly conceal the effect which the knowledge of
the step she had taken, wrought upon her mind.  She remembered that
both the crafty Jew and the brutal Sikes had confided to her schemes,
which had been hidden from all others: in the full confidence that she
was trustworthy and beyond the reach of their suspicion.  Vile as those
schemes were, desperate as were their originators, and bitter as were
her feelings towards Fagin, who had led her, step by step, deeper and
deeper down into an abyss of crime and misery, whence was no escape;
still, there were times when, even towards him, she felt some
relenting, lest her disclosure should bring him within the iron grasp
he had so long eluded, and he should fall at last--richly as he merited
such a fate--by her hand.

But, these were the mere wanderings of a mind unable wholly to detach
itself from old companions and associations, though enabled to fix
itself steadily on one object, and resolved not to be turned aside by
any consideration.  Her fears for Sikes would have been more powerful
inducements to recoil while there was yet time; but she had stipulated
that her secret should be rigidly kept, she had dropped no clue which
could lead to his discovery, she had refused, even for his sake, a
refuge from all the guilt and wretchedness that encompasses her--and
what more could she do! She was resolved.

Though all her mental struggles terminated in this conclusion, they
forced themselves upon her, again and again, and left their traces too.
She grew pale and thin, even within a few days.  At times, she took no
heed of what was passing before her, or no part in conversations where
once, she would have been the loudest.  At other times, she laughed
without merriment, and was noisy without a moment afterwards--she sat
silent and dejected, brooding with her head upon her hands, while the
very effort by which she roused herself, told, more forcibly than even
these indications, that she was ill at ease, and that her thoughts were
occupied with matters very different and distant from those in the
course of discussion by her companions.

It was Sunday night, and the bell of the nearest church struck the
hour.  Sikes and the Jew were talking, but they paused to listen.  The
girl looked up from the low seat on which she crouched, and listened
too.  Eleven.

'An hour this side of midnight,' said Sikes, raising the blind to look
out and returning to his seat.  'Dark and heavy it is too. A good night
for business this.'

'Ah!' replied Fagin.  'What a pity, Bill, my dear, that there's none
quite ready to be done.'

'You're right for once,' replied Sikes gruffly.  'It is a pity, for I'm
in the humour too.'

Fagin sighed, and shook his head despondingly.

'We must make up for lost time when we've got things into a good train.
That's all I know,' said Sikes.

'That's the way to talk, my dear,' replied Fagin, venturing to pat him
on the shoulder.  'It does me good to hear you.'

'Does you good, does it!' cried Sikes.  'Well, so be it.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' laughed Fagin, as if he were relieved by even this
concession.  'You're like yourself to-night, Bill.  Quite like
yourself.'

'I don't feel like myself when you lay that withered old claw on my
shoulder, so take it away,' said Sikes, casting off the Jew's hand.

'It make you nervous, Bill,--reminds you of being nabbed, does it?'
said Fagin, determined not to be offended.

'Reminds me of being nabbed by the devil,' returned Sikes. 'There never
was another man with such a face as yours, unless it was your father,
and I suppose _he_ is singeing his grizzled red beard by this time,
unless you came straight from the old 'un without any father at all
betwixt you; which I shouldn't wonder at, a bit.'

Fagin offered no reply to this compliment:  but, pulling Sikes by the
sleeve, pointed his finger towards Nancy, who had taken advantage of
the foregoing conversation to put on her bonnet, and was now leaving
the room.

'Hallo!' cried Sikes.  'Nance.  Where's the gal going to at this time
of night?'

'Not far.'

'What answer's that?' retorted Sikes.  'Do you hear me?'

'I don't know where,' replied the girl.

'Then I do,' said Sikes, more in the spirit of obstinacy than because
he had any real objection to the girl going where she listed.
'Nowhere.  Sit down.'

'I'm not well.  I told you that before,' rejoined the girl.  'I want a
breath of air.'

'Put your head out of the winder,' replied Sikes.

'There's not enough there,' said the girl.  'I want it in the street.'

'Then you won't have it,' replied Sikes.  With which assurance he rose,
locked the door, took the key out, and pulling her bonnet from her
head, flung it up to the top of an old press.  'There,' said the
robber.  'Now stop quietly where you are, will you?'

'It's not such a matter as a bonnet would keep me,' said the girl
turning very pale.  'What do you mean, Bill?  Do you know what you're
doing?'

'Know what I'm--Oh!' cried Sikes, turning to Fagin, 'she's out of her
senses, you know, or she daren't talk to me in that way.'

'You'll drive me on the something desperate,' muttered the girl placing
both hands upon her breast, as though to keep down by force some
violent outbreak.  'Let me go, will you,--this minute--this instant.'

'No!' said Sikes.

'Tell him to let me go, Fagin.  He had better.  It'll be better for
him.  Do you hear me?' cried Nancy stamping her foot upon the ground.

'Hear you!' repeated Sikes turning round in his chair to confront her.
'Aye!  And if I hear you for half a minute longer, the dog shall have
such a grip on your throat as'll tear some of that screaming voice out.
Wot has come over you, you jade!  Wot is it?'

'Let me go,' said the girl with great earnestness; then sitting herself
down on the floor, before the door, she said, 'Bill, let me go; you
don't know what you are doing. You don't, indeed.  For only one
hour--do--do!'

'Cut my limbs off one by one!' cried Sikes, seizing her roughly by the
arm, 'If I don't think the gal's stark raving mad.  Get up.'

'Not till you let me go--not till you let me go--Never--never!'
screamed the girl.  Sikes looked on, for a minute, watching his
opportunity, and suddenly pinioning her hands dragged her, struggling
and wrestling with him by the way, into a small room adjoining, where
he sat himself on a bench, and thrusting her into a chair, held her
down by force.  She struggled and implored by turns until twelve
o'clock had struck, and then, wearied and exhausted, ceased to contest
the point any further.  With a caution, backed by many oaths, to make
no more efforts to go out that night, Sikes left her to recover at
leisure and rejoined Fagin.

'Whew!' said the housebreaker wiping the perspiration from his face.
'Wot a precious strange gal that is!'

'You may say that, Bill,' replied Fagin thoughtfully.  'You may say
that.'

'Wot did she take it into her head to go out to-night for, do you
think?' asked Sikes.  'Come; you should know her better than me. Wot
does it mean?'

'Obstinacy; woman's obstinacy, I suppose, my dear.'

'Well, I suppose it is,' growled Sikes.  'I thought I had tamed her,
but she's as bad as ever.'

'Worse,' said Fagin thoughtfully.  'I never knew her like this, for
such a little cause.'

'Nor I,' said Sikes.  'I think she's got a touch of that fever in her
blood yet, and it won't come out--eh?'

'Like enough.'

'I'll let her a little blood, without troubling the doctor, if she's
took that way again,' said Sikes.

Fagin nodded an expressive approval of this mode of treatment.

'She was hanging about me all day, and night too, when I was stretched
on my back; and you, like a blackhearted wolf as you are, kept yourself
aloof,' said Sikes.  'We was poor too, all the time, and I think, one
way or other, it's worried and fretted her; and that being shut up here
so long has made her restless--eh?'

'That's it, my dear,' replied the Jew in a whisper.  'Hush!'

As he uttered these words, the girl herself appeared and resumed her
former seat.  Her eyes were swollen and red; she rocked herself to and
fro; tossed her head; and, after a little time, burst out laughing.

'Why, now she's on the other tack!' exclaimed Sikes, turning a look of
excessive surprise on his companion.

Fagin nodded to him to take no further notice just then; and, in a few
minutes, the girl subsided into her accustomed demeanour. Whispering
Sikes that there was no fear of her relapsing, Fagin took up his hat
and bade him good-night.  He paused when he reached the room-door, and
looking round, asked if somebody would light him down the dark stairs.

'Light him down,' said Sikes, who was filling his pipe. 'It's a pity he
should break his neck himself, and disappoint the sight-seers.  Show
him a light.'

Nancy followed the old man downstairs, with a candle.  When they
reached the passage, he laid his finger on his lip, and drawing close
to the girl, said, in a whisper.

'What is it, Nancy, dear?'

'What do you mean?' replied the girl, in the same tone.

'The reason of all this,' replied Fagin.  'If _he_'--he pointed with
his skinny fore-finger up the stairs--'is so hard with you (he's a
brute, Nance, a brute-beast), why don't you--'

'Well?' said the girl, as Fagin paused, with his mouth almost touching
her ear, and his eyes looking into hers.

'No matter just now.  We'll talk of this again.  You have a friend in
me, Nance; a staunch friend.  I have the means at hand, quiet and
close.  If you want revenge on those that treat you like a dog--like a
dog!  worse than his dog, for he humours him sometimes--come to me.  I
say, come to me.  He is the mere hound of a day, but you know me of
old, Nance.'

'I know you well,' replied the girl, without manifesting the least
emotion.  'Good-night.'

She shrank back, as Fagin offered to lay his hand on hers, but said
good-night again, in a steady voice, and, answering his parting look
with a nod of intelligence, closed the door between them.

Fagin walked towards his home, intent upon the thoughts that were
working within his brain.  He had conceived the idea--not from what had
just passed though that had tended to confirm him, but slowly and by
degrees--that Nancy, wearied of the housebreaker's brutality, had
conceived an attachment for some new friend.  Her altered manner, her
repeated absences from home alone, her comparative indifference to the
interests of the gang for which she had once been so zealous, and,
added to these, her desperate impatience to leave home that night at a
particular hour, all favoured the supposition, and rendered it, to him
at least, almost matter of certainty.  The object of this new liking
was not among his myrmidons.  He would be a valuable acquisition with
such an assistant as Nancy, and must (thus Fagin argued) be secured
without delay.

There was another, and a darker object, to be gained.  Sikes knew too
much, and his ruffian taunts had not galled Fagin the less, because the
wounds were hidden.  The girl must know, well, that if she shook him
off, she could never be safe from his fury, and that it would be surely
wreaked--to the maiming of limbs, or perhaps the loss of life--on the
object of her more recent fancy.

'With a little persuasion,' thought Fagin, 'what more likely than that
she would consent to poison him?  Women have done such things, and
worse, to secure the same object before now.  There would be the
dangerous villain:  the man I hate:  gone; another secured in his
place; and my influence over the girl, with a knowledge of this crime
to back it, unlimited.'

These things passed through the mind of Fagin, during the short time he
sat alone, in the housebreaker's room; and with them uppermost in his
thoughts, he had taken the opportunity afterwards afforded him, of
sounding the girl in the broken hints he threw out at parting.  There
was no expression of surprise, no assumption of an inability to
understand his meaning.  The girl clearly comprehended it.  Her glance
at parting showed _that_.

But perhaps she would recoil from a plot to take the life of Sikes, and
that was one of the chief ends to be attained. 'How,' thought Fagin, as
he crept homeward, 'can I increase my influence with her?  What new
power can I acquire?'

Such brains are fertile in expedients.  If, without extracting a
confession from herself, he laid a watch, discovered the object of her
altered regard, and threatened to reveal the whole history to Sikes (of
whom she stood in no common fear) unless she entered into his designs,
could he not secure her compliance?

'I can,' said Fagin, almost aloud.  'She durst not refuse me then.  Not
for her life, not for her life!  I have it all.  The means are ready,
and shall be set to work.  I shall have you yet!'

He cast back a dark look, and a threatening motion of the hand, towards
the spot where he had left the bolder villain; and went on his way:
busying his bony hands in the folds of his tattered garment, which he
wrenched tightly in his grasp, as though there were a hated enemy
crushed with every motion of his fingers.



CHAPTER XLV

NOAH CLAYPOLE IS EMPLOYED BY FAGIN ON A SECRET MISSION

The old man was up, betimes, next morning, and waited impatiently for
the appearance of his new associate, who after a delay that seemed
interminable, at length presented himself, and commenced a voracious
assault on the breakfast.

'Bolter,' said Fagin, drawing up a chair and seating himself opposite
Morris Bolter.

'Well, here I am,' returned Noah.  'What's the matter?  Don't yer ask
me to do anything till I have done eating. That's a great fault in this
place.  Yer never get time enough over yer meals.'

'You can talk as you eat, can't you?' said Fagin, cursing his dear
young friend's greediness from the very bottom of his heart.

'Oh yes, I can talk.  I get on better when I talk,' said Noah, cutting
a monstrous slice of bread.  'Where's Charlotte?'

'Out,' said Fagin.  'I sent her out this morning with the other young
woman, because I wanted us to be alone.'

'Oh!' said Noah.  'I wish yer'd ordered her to make some buttered toast
first.  Well.  Talk away.  Yer won't interrupt me.'

There seemed, indeed, no great fear of anything interrupting him, as he
had evidently sat down with a determination to do a great deal of
business.

'You did well yesterday, my dear,' said Fagin.  'Beautiful!  Six
shillings and ninepence halfpenny on the very first day!  The kinchin
lay will be a fortune to you.'

'Don't you forget to add three pint-pots and a milk-can,' said Mr.
Bolter.

'No, no, my dear.  The pint-pots were great strokes of genius: but the
milk-can was a perfect masterpiece.'

'Pretty well, I think, for a beginner,' remarked Mr. Bolter
complacently.  'The pots I took off airy railings, and the milk-can was
standing by itself outside a public-house.  I thought it might get
rusty with the rain, or catch cold, yer know.  Eh?  Ha! ha! ha!'

Fagin affected to laugh very heartily; and Mr. Bolter having had his
laugh out, took a series of large bites, which finished his first hunk
of bread and butter, and assisted himself to a second.

'I want you, Bolter,' said Fagin, leaning over the table, 'to do a
piece of work for me, my dear, that needs great care and caution.'

'I say,' rejoined Bolter, 'don't yer go shoving me into danger, or
sending me any more o' yer police-offices. That don't suit me, that
don't; and so I tell yer.'

'That's not the smallest danger in it--not the very smallest,' said the
Jew; 'it's only to dodge a woman.'

'An old woman?' demanded Mr. Bolter.

'A young one,' replied Fagin.

'I can do that pretty well, I know,' said Bolter.  'I was a regular
cunning sneak when I was at school.  What am I to dodge her for?  Not
to--'

'Not to do anything, but to tell me where she goes, who she sees, and,
if possible, what she says; to remember the street, if it is a street,
or the house, if it is a house; and to bring me back all the
information you can.'

'What'll yer give me?' asked Noah, setting down his cup, and looking
his employer, eagerly, in the face.

'If you do it well, a pound, my dear.  One pound,' said Fagin, wishing
to interest him in the scent as much as possible.  'And that's what I
never gave yet, for any job of work where there wasn't valuable
consideration to be gained.'

'Who is she?' inquired Noah.

'One of us.'

'Oh Lor!' cried Noah, curling up his nose.  'Yer doubtful of her, are
yer?'

'She has found out some new friends, my dear, and I must know who they
are,' replied Fagin.

'I see,' said Noah.  'Just to have the pleasure of knowing them, if
they're respectable people, eh?  Ha! ha! ha! I'm your man.'

'I knew you would be,' cried Fagin, elated by the success of his
proposal.

'Of course, of course,' replied Noah.  'Where is she? Where am I to
wait for her?  Where am I to go?'

'All that, my dear, you shall hear from me.  I'll point her out at the
proper time,' said Fagin.  'You keep ready, and leave the rest to me.'

That night, and the next, and the next again, the spy sat booted and
equipped in his carter's dress:  ready to turn out at a word from
Fagin.  Six nights passed--six long weary nights--and on each, Fagin
came home with a disappointed face, and briefly intimated that it was
not yet time.  On the seventh, he returned earlier, and with an
exultation he could not conceal.  It was Sunday.

'She goes abroad to-night,' said Fagin, 'and on the right errand, I'm
sure; for she has been alone all day, and the man she is afraid of will
not be back much before daybreak.  Come with me. Quick!'

Noah started up without saying a word; for the Jew was in a state of
such intense excitement that it infected him.  They left the house
stealthily, and hurrying through a labyrinth of streets, arrived at
length before a public-house, which Noah recognised as the same in
which he had slept, on the night of his arrival in London.

It was past eleven o'clock, and the door was closed.  It opened softly
on its hinges as Fagin gave a low whistle. They entered, without noise;
and the door was closed behind them.

Scarcely venturing to whisper, but substituting dumb show for words,
Fagin, and the young Jew who had admitted them, pointed out the pane of
glass to Noah, and signed to him to climb up and observe the person in
the adjoining room.

'Is that the woman?' he asked, scarcely above his breath.

Fagin nodded yes.

'I can't see her face well,' whispered Noah.  'She is looking down, and
the candle is behind her.

'Stay there,' whispered Fagin.  He signed to Barney, who withdrew.  In
an instant, the lad entered the room adjoining, and, under pretence of
snuffing the candle, moved it in the required position, and, speaking
to the girl, caused her to raise her face.

'I see her now,' cried the spy.

'Plainly?'

'I should know her among a thousand.'

He hastily descended, as the room-door opened, and the girl came out.
Fagin drew him behind a small partition which was curtained off, and
they held their breaths as she passed within a few feet of their place
of concealment, and emerged by the door at which they had entered.

'Hist!' cried the lad who held the door.  'Dow.'

Noah exchanged a look with Fagin, and darted out.

'To the left,' whispered the lad; 'take the left had, and keep od the
other side.'

He did so; and, by the light of the lamps, saw the girl's retreating
figure, already at some distance before him.  He advanced as near as he
considered prudent, and kept on the opposite side of the street, the
better to observe her motions. She looked nervously round, twice or
thrice, and once stopped to let two men who were following close behind
her, pass on.  She seemed to gather courage as she advanced, and to
walk with a steadier and firmer step.  The spy preserved the same
relative distance between them, and followed:  with his eye upon her.



CHAPTER XLVI

THE APPOINTMENT KEPT

The church clocks chimed three quarters past eleven, as two figures
emerged on London Bridge.  One, which advanced with a swift and rapid
step, was that of a woman who looked eagerly about her as though in
quest of some expected object; the other figure was that of a man, who
slunk along in the deepest shadow he could find, and, at some distance,
accommodated his pace to hers:  stopping when she stopped:  and as she
moved again, creeping stealthily on:  but never allowing himself, in
the ardour of his pursuit, to gain upon her footsteps.  Thus, they
crossed the bridge, from the Middlesex to the Surrey shore, when the
woman, apparently disappointed in her anxious scrutiny of the
foot-passengers, turned back.  The movement was sudden; but he who
watched her, was not thrown off his guard by it; for, shrinking into
one of the recesses which surmount the piers of the bridge, and leaning
over the parapet the better to conceal his figure, he suffered her to
pass on the opposite pavement. When she was about the same distance in
advance as she had been before, he slipped quietly down, and followed
her again. At nearly the centre of the bridge, she stopped.  The man
stopped too.

It was a very dark night.  The day had been unfavourable, and at that
hour and place there were few people stirring. Such as there were,
hurried quickly past:  very possibly without seeing, but certainly
without noticing, either the woman, or the man who kept her in view.
Their appearance was not calculated to attract the importunate regards
of such of London's destitute population, as chanced to take their way
over the bridge that night in search of some cold arch or doorless
hovel wherein to lay their heads; they stood there in silence:  neither
speaking nor spoken to, by any one who passed.

A mist hung over the river, deepening the red glare of the fires that
burnt upon the small craft moored off the different wharfs, and
rendering darker and more indistinct the murky buildings on the banks.
The old smoke-stained storehouses on either side, rose heavy and dull
from the dense mass of roofs and gables, and frowned sternly upon water
too black to reflect even their lumbering shapes. The tower of old
Saint Saviour's Church, and the spire of Saint Magnus, so long the
giant-warders of the ancient bridge, were visible in the gloom; but the
forest of shipping below bridge, and the thickly scattered spires of
churches above, were nearly all hidden from sight.

The girl had taken a few restless turns to and fro--closely watched
meanwhile by her hidden observer--when the heavy bell of St. Paul's
tolled for the death of another day.  Midnight had come upon the
crowded city.  The palace, the night-cellar, the jail, the madhouse:
the chambers of birth and death, of health and sickness, the rigid face
of the corpse and the calm sleep of the child:  midnight was upon them
all.

The hour had not struck two minutes, when a young lady, accompanied by
a grey-haired gentleman, alighted from a hackney-carriage within a
short distance of the bridge, and, having dismissed the vehicle, walked
straight towards it.  They had scarcely set foot upon its pavement,
when the girl started, and immediately made towards them.

They walked onward, looking about them with the air of persons who
entertained some very slight expectation which had little chance of
being realised, when they were suddenly joined by this new associate.
They halted with an exclamation of surprise, but suppressed it
immediately; for a man in the garments of a countryman came close
up--brushed against them, indeed--at that precise moment.

'Not here,' said Nancy hurriedly, 'I am afraid to speak to you here.
Come away--out of the public road--down the steps yonder!'

As she uttered these words, and indicated, with her hand, the direction
in which she wished them to proceed, the countryman looked round, and
roughly asking what they took up the whole pavement for, passed on.

The steps to which the girl had pointed, were those which, on the
Surrey bank, and on the same side of the bridge as Saint Saviour's
Church, form a landing-stairs from the river.  To this spot, the man
bearing the appearance of a countryman, hastened unobserved; and after
a moment's survey of the place, he began to descend.

These stairs are a part of the bridge; they consist of three flights.
Just below the end of the second, going down, the stone wall on the
left terminates in an ornamental pilaster facing towards the Thames.
At this point the lower steps widen:  so that a person turning that
angle of the wall, is necessarily unseen by any others on the stairs
who chance to be above him, if only a step. The countryman looked
hastily round, when he reached this point; and as there seemed no
better place of concealment, and, the tide being out, there was plenty
of room, he slipped aside, with his back to the pilaster, and there
waited:  pretty certain that they would come no lower, and that even if
he could not hear what was said, he could follow them again, with
safety.

So tardily stole the time in this lonely place, and so eager was the
spy to penetrate the motives of an interview so different from what he
had been led to expect, that he more than once gave the matter up for
lost, and persuaded himself, either that they had stopped far above, or
had resorted to some entirely different spot to hold their mysterious
conversation.  He was on the point of emerging from his hiding-place,
and regaining the road above, when he heard the sound of footsteps, and
directly afterwards of voices almost close at his ear.

He drew himself straight upright against the wall, and, scarcely
breathing, listened attentively.

'This is far enough,' said a voice, which was evidently that of the
gentleman.  'I will not suffer the young lady to go any farther.  Many
people would have distrusted you too much to have come even so far, but
you see I am willing to humour you.'

'To humour me!' cried the voice of the girl whom he had followed.
'You're considerate, indeed, sir.  To humour me!  Well, well, it's no
matter.'

'Why, for what,' said the gentleman in a kinder tone, 'for what purpose
can you have brought us to this strange place?  Why not have let me
speak to you, above there, where it is light, and there is something
stirring, instead of bringing us to this dark and dismal hole?'

'I told you before,' replied Nancy, 'that I was afraid to speak to you
there.  I don't know why it is,' said the girl, shuddering, 'but I have
such a fear and dread upon me to-night that I can hardly stand.'

'A fear of what?' asked the gentleman, who seemed to pity her.

'I scarcely know of what,' replied the girl.  'I wish I did. Horrible
thoughts of death, and shrouds with blood upon them, and a fear that
has made me burn as if I was on fire, have been upon me all day.  I was
reading a book to-night, to wile the time away, and the same things
came into the print.'

'Imagination,' said the gentleman, soothing her.

'No imagination,' replied the girl in a hoarse voice. 'I'll swear I saw
"coffin" written in every page of the book in large black
letters,--aye, and they carried one close to me, in the streets
to-night.'

'There is nothing unusual in that,' said the gentleman. 'They have
passed me often.'

'_Real ones_,' rejoined the girl.  'This was not.'

There was something so uncommon in her manner, that the flesh of the
concealed listener crept as he heard the girl utter these words, and
the blood chilled within him.  He had never experienced a greater
relief than in hearing the sweet voice of the young lady as she begged
her to be calm, and not allow herself to become the prey of such
fearful fancies.

'Speak to her kindly,' said the young lady to her companion. 'Poor
creature!  She seems to need it.'

'Your haughty religious people would have held their heads up to see me
as I am to-night, and preached of flames and vengeance,' cried the
girl.  'Oh, dear lady, why ar'n't those who claim to be God's own folks
as gentle and as kind to us poor wretches as you, who, having youth,
and beauty, and all that they have lost, might be a little proud
instead of so much humbler?'

'Ah!' said the gentleman.  'A Turk turns his face, after washing it
well, to the East, when he says his prayers; these good people, after
giving their faces such a rub against the World as to take the smiles
off, turn with no less regularity, to the darkest side of Heaven.
Between the Mussulman and the Pharisee, commend me to the first!'

These words appeared to be addressed to the young lady, and were
perhaps uttered with the view of affording Nancy time to recover
herself.  The gentleman, shortly afterwards, addressed himself to her.

'You were not here last Sunday night,' he said.

'I couldn't come,' replied Nancy; 'I was kept by force.'

'By whom?'

'Him that I told the young lady of before.'

'You were not suspected of holding any communication with anybody on
the subject which has brought us here to-night, I hope?' asked the old
gentleman.

'No,' replied the girl, shaking her head.  'It's not very easy for me
to leave him unless he knows why; I couldn't give him a drink of
laudanum before I came away.'

'Did he awake before you returned?' inquired the gentleman.

'No; and neither he nor any of them suspect me.'

'Good,' said the gentleman.  'Now listen to me.'

'I am ready,' replied the girl, as he paused for a moment.

'This young lady,' the gentleman began, 'has communicated to me, and to
some other friends who can be safely trusted, what you told her nearly
a fortnight since.  I confess to you that I had doubts, at first,
whether you were to be implicitly relied upon, but now I firmly believe
you are.'

'I am,' said the girl earnestly.

'I repeat that I firmly believe it.  To prove to you that I am disposed
to trust you, I tell you without reserve, that we propose to extort the
secret, whatever it may be, from the fear of this man Monks.  But
if--if--' said the gentleman, 'he cannot be secured, or, if secured,
cannot be acted upon as we wish, you must deliver up the Jew.'

'Fagin,' cried the girl, recoiling.

'That man must be delivered up by you,' said the gentleman.

'I will not do it!  I will never do it!' replied the girl. 'Devil that
he is, and worse than devil as he has been to me, I will never do that.'

'You will not?' said the gentleman, who seemed fully prepared for this
answer.

'Never!' returned the girl.

'Tell me why?'

'For one reason,' rejoined the girl firmly, 'for one reason, that the
lady knows and will stand by me in, I know she will, for I have her
promise:  and for this other reason, besides, that, bad life as he has
led, I have led a bad life too; there are many of us who have kept the
same courses together, and I'll not turn upon them, who might--any of
them--have turned upon me, but didn't, bad as they are.'

'Then,' said the gentleman, quickly, as if this had been the point he
had been aiming to attain; 'put Monks into my hands, and leave him to
me to deal with.'

'What if he turns against the others?'

'I promise you that in that case, if the truth is forced from him,
there the matter will rest; there must be circumstances in Oliver's
little history which it would be painful to drag before the public eye,
and if the truth is once elicited, they shall go scot free.'

'And if it is not?' suggested the girl.

'Then,' pursued the gentleman, 'this Fagin shall not be brought to
justice without your consent.  In such a case I could show you reasons,
I think, which would induce you to yield it.'

'Have I the lady's promise for that?' asked the girl.

'You have,' replied Rose.  'My true and faithful pledge.'

'Monks would never learn how you knew what you do?' said the girl,
after a short pause.

'Never,' replied the gentleman.  'The intelligence should be brought to
bear upon him, that he could never even guess.'

'I have been a liar, and among liars from a little child,' said the
girl after another interval of silence, 'but I will take your words.'

After receiving an assurance from both, that she might safely do so,
she proceeded in a voice so low that it was often difficult for the
listener to discover even the purport of what she said, to describe, by
name and situation, the public-house whence she had been followed that
night.  From the manner in which she occasionally paused, it appeared
as if the gentleman were making some hasty notes of the information she
communicated.  When she had thoroughly explained the localities of the
place, the best position from which to watch it without exciting
observation, and the night and hour on which Monks was most in the
habit of frequenting it, she seemed to consider for a few moments, for
the purpose of recalling his features and appearances more forcibly to
her recollection.

'He is tall,' said the girl, 'and a strongly made man, but not stout;
he has a lurking walk; and as he walks, constantly looks over his
shoulder, first on one side, and then on the other. Don't forget that,
for his eyes are sunk in his head so much deeper than any other man's,
that you might almost tell him by that alone.  His face is dark, like
his hair and eyes; and, although he can't be more than six or eight and
twenty, withered and haggard. His lips are often discoloured and
disfigured with the marks of teeth; for he has desperate fits, and
sometimes even bites his hands and covers them with wounds--why did you
start?' said the girl, stopping suddenly.

The gentleman replied, in a hurried manner, that he was not conscious
of having done so, and begged her to proceed.

'Part of this,' said the girl, 'I have drawn out from other people at
the house I tell you of, for I have only seen him twice, and both times
he was covered up in a large cloak.  I think that's all I can give you
to know him by.  Stay though,' she added.  'Upon his throat:  so high
that you can see a part of it below his neckerchief when he turns his
face:  there is--'

'A broad red mark, like a burn or scald?' cried the gentleman.

'How's this?' said the girl.  'You know him!'

The young lady uttered a cry of surprise, and for a few moments they
were so still that the listener could distinctly hear them breathe.

'I think I do,' said the gentleman, breaking silence.  'I should by
your description.  We shall see.  Many people are singularly like each
other.  It may not be the same.'

As he expressed himself to this effect, with assumed carelessness, he
took a step or two nearer the concealed spy, as the latter could tell
from the distinctness with which he heard him mutter, 'It must be he!'

'Now,' he said, returning:  so it seemed by the sound:  to the spot
where he had stood before, 'you have given us most valuable assistance,
young woman, and I wish you to be the better for it. What can I do to
serve you?'

'Nothing,' replied Nancy.

'You will not persist in saying that,' rejoined the gentleman, with a
voice and emphasis of kindness that might have touched a much harder
and more obdurate heart. 'Think now.  Tell me.'

'Nothing, sir,' rejoined the girl, weeping.  'You can do nothing to
help me.  I am past all hope, indeed.'

'You put yourself beyond its pale,' said the gentleman. 'The past has
been a dreary waste with you, of youthful energies mis-spent, and such
priceless treasures lavished, as the Creator bestows but once and never
grants again, but, for the future, you may hope. I do not say that it
is in our power to offer you peace of heart and mind, for that must
come as you seek it; but a quiet asylum, either in England, or, if you
fear to remain here, in some foreign country, it is not only within the
compass of our ability but our most anxious wish to secure you. Before
the dawn of morning, before this river wakes to the first glimpse of
day-light, you shall be placed as entirely beyond the reach of your
former associates, and leave as utter an absence of all trace behind
you, as if you were to disappear from the earth this moment.  Come!  I
would not have you go back to exchange one word with any old companion,
or take one look at any old haunt, or breathe the very air which is
pestilence and death to you.  Quit them all, while there is time and
opportunity!'

'She will be persuaded now,' cried the young lady.  'She hesitates, I
am sure.'

'I fear not, my dear,' said the gentleman.

'No sir, I do not,' replied the girl, after a short struggle.  'I am
chained to my old life.  I loathe and hate it now, but I cannot leave
it.  I must have gone too far to turn back,--and yet I don't know, for
if you had spoken to me so, some time ago, I should have laughed it
off.  But,' she said, looking hastily round, 'this fear comes over me
again.  I must go home.'

'Home!' repeated the young lady, with great stress upon the word.

'Home, lady,' rejoined the girl.  'To such a home as I have raised for
myself with the work of my whole life.  Let us part. I shall be watched
or seen.  Go!  Go!  If I have done you any service all I ask is, that
you leave me, and let me go my way alone.'

'It is useless,' said the gentleman, with a sigh.  'We compromise her
safety, perhaps, by staying here.  We may have detained her longer than
she expected already.'

'Yes, yes,' urged the girl. 'You have.'

'What,' cried the young lady, 'can be the end of this poor creature's
life!'

'What!' repeated the girl.  'Look before you, lady.  Look at that dark
water.  How many times do you read of such as I who spring into the
tide, and leave no living thing, to care for, or bewail them.  It may
be years hence, or it may be only months, but I shall come to that at
last.'

'Do not speak thus, pray,' returned the young lady, sobbing.

'It will never reach your ears, dear lady, and God forbid such horrors
should!' replied the girl.  'Good-night, good-night!'

The gentleman turned away.

'This purse,' cried the young lady.  'Take it for my sake, that you may
have some resource in an hour of need and trouble.'

'No!' replied the girl.  'I have not done this for money.  Let me have
that to think of.  And yet--give me something that you have worn:  I
should like to have something--no, no, not a ring--your gloves or
handkerchief--anything that I can keep, as having belonged to you,
sweet lady.  There.  Bless you!  God bless you. Good-night, good-night!'

The violent agitation of the girl, and the apprehension of some
discovery which would subject her to ill-usage and violence, seemed to
determine the gentleman to leave her, as she requested.

The sound of retreating footsteps were audible and the voices ceased.

The two figures of the young lady and her companion soon afterwards
appeared upon the bridge.  They stopped at the summit of the stairs.

'Hark!' cried the young lady, listening.  'Did she call!  I thought I
heard her voice.'

'No, my love,' replied Mr. Brownlow, looking sadly back. 'She has not
moved, and will not till we are gone.'

Rose Maylie lingered, but the old gentleman drew her arm through his,
and led her, with gentle force, away.  As they disappeared, the girl
sunk down nearly at her full length upon one of the stone stairs, and
vented the anguish of her heart in bitter tears.

After a time she arose, and with feeble and tottering steps ascended
the street.  The astonished listener remained motionless on his post
for some minutes afterwards, and having ascertained, with many cautious
glances round him, that he was again alone, crept slowly from his
hiding-place, and returned, stealthily and in the shade of the wall, in
the same manner as he had descended.

Peeping out, more than once, when he reached the top, to make sure that
he was unobserved, Noah Claypole darted away at his utmost speed, and
made for the Jew's house as fast as his legs would carry him.



CHAPTER XLVII

FATAL CONSEQUENCES

It was nearly two hours before day-break; that time which in the autumn
of the year, may be truly called the dead of night; when the streets
are silent and deserted; when even sounds appear to slumber, and
profligacy and riot have staggered home to dream; it was at this still
and silent hour, that Fagin sat watching in his old lair, with face so
distorted and pale, and eyes so red and blood-shot, that he looked less
like a man, than like some hideous phantom, moist from the grave, and
worried by an evil spirit.

He sat crouching over a cold hearth, wrapped in an old torn coverlet,
with his face turned towards a wasting candle that stood upon a table
by his side.  His right hand was raised to his lips, and as, absorbed
in thought, he hit his long black nails, he disclosed among his
toothless gums a few such fangs as should have been a dog's or rat's.

Stretched upon a mattress on the floor, lay Noah Claypole, fast asleep.
Towards him the old man sometimes directed his eyes for an instant, and
then brought them back again to the candle; which with a long-burnt
wick drooping almost double, and hot grease falling down in clots upon
the table, plainly showed that his thoughts were busy elsewhere.

Indeed they were.  Mortification at the overthrow of his notable
scheme; hatred of the girl who had dared to palter with strangers; and
utter distrust of the sincerity of her refusal to yield him up; bitter
disappointment at the loss of his revenge on Sikes; the fear of
detection, and ruin, and death; and a fierce and deadly rage kindled by
all; these were the passionate considerations which, following close
upon each other with rapid and ceaseless whirl, shot through the brain
of Fagin, as every evil thought and blackest purpose lay working at his
heart.

He sat without changing his attitude in the least, or appearing to take
the smallest heed of time, until his quick ear seemed to be attracted
by a footstep in the street.

'At last,' he muttered, wiping his dry and fevered mouth. 'At last!'

The bell rang gently as he spoke.  He crept upstairs to the door, and
presently returned accompanied by a man muffled to the chin, who
carried a bundle under one arm. Sitting down and throwing back his
outer coat, the man displayed the burly frame of Sikes.

'There!' he said, laying the bundle on the table.  'Take care of that,
and do the most you can with it.  It's been trouble enough to get; I
thought I should have been here, three hours ago.'

Fagin laid his hand upon the bundle, and locking it in the cupboard,
sat down again without speaking.  But he did not take his eyes off the
robber, for an instant, during this action; and now that they sat over
against each other, face to face, he looked fixedly at him, with his
lips quivering so violently, and his face so altered by the emotions
which had mastered him, that the housebreaker involuntarily drew back
his chair, and surveyed him with a look of real affright.

'Wot now?' cried Sikes.  'Wot do you look at a man so for?'

Fagin raised his right hand, and shook his trembling forefinger in the
air; but his passion was so great, that the power of speech was for the
moment gone.

'Damme!' said Sikes, feeling in his breast with a look of alarm. 'He's
gone mad.  I must look to myself here.'

'No, no,' rejoined Fagin, finding his voice.  'It's not--you're not the
person, Bill.  I've no--no fault to find with you.'

'Oh, you haven't, haven't you?' said Sikes, looking sternly at him, and
ostentatiously passing a pistol into a more convenient pocket.  'That's
lucky--for one of us.  Which one that is, don't matter.'

'I've got that to tell you, Bill,' said Fagin, drawing his chair
nearer, 'will make you worse than me.'

'Aye?' returned the robber with an incredulous air.  'Tell away! Look
sharp, or Nance will think I'm lost.'

'Lost!' cried Fagin.  'She has pretty well settled that, in her own
mind, already.'

Sikes looked with an aspect of great perplexity into the Jew's face,
and reading no satisfactory explanation of the riddle there, clenched
his coat collar in his huge hand and shook him soundly.

'Speak, will you!' he said; 'or if you don't, it shall be for want of
breath.  Open your mouth and say wot you've got to say in plain words.
Out with it, you thundering old cur, out with it!'

'Suppose that lad that's laying there--' Fagin began.

Sikes turned round to where Noah was sleeping, as if he had not
previously observed him.  'Well!' he said, resuming his former position.

'Suppose that lad,' pursued Fagin, 'was to peach--to blow upon us
all--first seeking out the right folks for the purpose, and then having
a meeting with 'em in the street to paint our likenesses, describe
every mark that they might know us by, and the crib where we might be
most easily taken.  Suppose he was to do all this, and besides to blow
upon a plant we've all been in, more or less--of his own fancy; not
grabbed, trapped, tried, earwigged by the parson and brought to it on
bread and water,--but of his own fancy; to please his own taste;
stealing out at nights to find those most interested against us, and
peaching to them.  Do you hear me?' cried the Jew, his eyes flashing
with rage.  'Suppose he did all this, what then?'

'What then!' replied Sikes; with a tremendous oath.  'If he was left
alive till I came, I'd grind his skull under the iron heel of my boot
into as many grains as there are hairs upon his head.'

'What if I did it!' cried Fagin almost in a yell.  'I, that knows so
much, and could hang so many besides myself!'

'I don't know,' replied Sikes, clenching his teeth and turning white at
the mere suggestion.  'I'd do something in the jail that 'ud get me put
in irons; and if I was tried along with you, I'd fall upon you with
them in the open court, and beat your brains out afore the people. I
should have such strength,' muttered the robber, poising his brawny
arm, 'that I could smash your head as if a loaded waggon had gone over
it.'

'You would?'

'Would I!' said the housebreaker.  'Try me.'

'If it was Charley, or the Dodger, or Bet, or--'

'I don't care who,' replied Sikes impatiently.  'Whoever it was, I'd
serve them the same.'

Fagin looked hard at the robber; and, motioning him to be silent,
stooped over the bed upon the floor, and shook the sleeper to rouse
him.  Sikes leant forward in his chair:  looking on with his hands upon
his knees, as if wondering much what all this questioning and
preparation was to end in.

'Bolter, Bolter!  Poor lad!' said Fagin, looking up with an expression
of devilish anticipation, and speaking slowly and with marked emphasis.
'He's tired--tired with watching for her so long,--watching for _her_,
Bill.'

'Wot d'ye mean?' asked Sikes, drawing back.

Fagin made no answer, but bending over the sleeper again, hauled him
into a sitting posture.  When his assumed name had been repeated
several times, Noah rubbed his eyes, and, giving a heavy yawn, looked
sleepily about him.

'Tell me that again--once again, just for him to hear,' said the Jew,
pointing to Sikes as he spoke.

'Tell yer what?' asked the sleepy Noah, shaking himself pettishly.

'That about-- _Nancy_,' said Fagin, clutching Sikes by the wrist, as if
to prevent his leaving the house before he had heard enough. 'You
followed her?'

'Yes.'

'To London Bridge?'

'Yes.'

'Where she met two people.'

'So she did.'

'A gentleman and a lady that she had gone to of her own accord before,
who asked her to give up all her pals, and Monks first, which she
did--and to describe him, which she did--and to tell her what house it
was that we meet at, and go to, which she did--and where it could be
best watched from, which she did--and what time the people went there,
which she did.  She did all this.  She told it all every word without a
threat, without a murmur--she did--did she not?' cried Fagin, half mad
with fury.

'All right,' replied Noah, scratching his head.  'That's just what it
was!'

'What did they say, about last Sunday?'

'About last Sunday!' replied Noah, considering.  'Why I told yer that
before.'

'Again.  Tell it again!' cried Fagin, tightening his grasp on Sikes,
and brandishing his other hand aloft, as the foam flew from his lips.

'They asked her,' said Noah, who, as he grew more wakeful, seemed to
have a dawning perception who Sikes was, 'they asked her why she didn't
come, last Sunday, as she promised.  She said she couldn't.'

'Why--why?  Tell him that.'

'Because she was forcibly kept at home by Bill, the man she had told
them of before,' replied Noah.

'What more of him?' cried Fagin.  'What more of the man she had told
them of before?  Tell him that, tell him that.'

'Why, that she couldn't very easily get out of doors unless he knew
where she was going to,' said Noah; 'and so the first time she went to
see the lady, she--ha! ha! ha! it made me laugh when she said it, that
it did--she gave him a drink of laudanum.'

'Hell's fire!' cried Sikes, breaking fiercely from the Jew.  'Let me
go!'

Flinging the old man from him, he rushed from the room, and darted,
wildly and furiously, up the stairs.

'Bill, Bill!' cried Fagin, following him hastily.  'A word. Only a
word.'

The word would not have been exchanged, but that the housebreaker was
unable to open the door:  on which he was expending fruitless oaths and
violence, when the Jew came panting up.

'Let me out,' said Sikes.  'Don't speak to me; it's not safe. Let me
out, I say!'

'Hear me speak a word,' rejoined Fagin, laying his hand upon the lock.
'You won't be--'

'Well,' replied the other.

'You won't be--too--violent, Bill?'

The day was breaking, and there was light enough for the men to see
each other's faces.  They exchanged one brief glance; there was a fire
in the eyes of both, which could not be mistaken.

'I mean,' said Fagin, showing that he felt all disguise was now
useless, 'not too violent for safety.  Be crafty, Bill, and not too
bold.'

Sikes made no reply; but, pulling open the door, of which Fagin had
turned the lock, dashed into the silent streets.

Without one pause, or moment's consideration; without once turning his
head to the right or left, or raising his eyes to the sky, or lowering
them to the ground, but looking straight before him with savage
resolution:  his teeth so tightly compressed that the strained jaw
seemed starting through his skin; the robber held on his headlong
course, nor muttered a word, nor relaxed a muscle, until he reached his
own door.  He opened it, softly, with a key; strode lightly up the
stairs; and entering his own room, double-locked the door, and lifting
a heavy table against it, drew back the curtain of the bed.

The girl was lying, half-dressed, upon it.  He had roused her from her
sleep, for she raised herself with a hurried and startled look.

'Get up!' said the man.

'It is you, Bill!' said the girl, with an expression of pleasure at his
return.

'It is,' was the reply.  'Get up.'

There was a candle burning, but the man hastily drew it from the
candlestick, and hurled it under the grate.  Seeing the faint light of
early day without, the girl rose to undraw the curtain.

'Let it be,' said Sikes, thrusting his hand before her. 'There's enough
light for wot I've got to do.'

'Bill,' said the girl, in the low voice of alarm, 'why do you look like
that at me!'

The robber sat regarding her, for a few seconds, with dilated nostrils
and heaving breast; and then, grasping her by the head and throat,
dragged her into the middle of the room, and looking once towards the
door, placed his heavy hand upon her mouth.

'Bill, Bill!' gasped the girl, wrestling with the strength of mortal
fear,--'I--I won't scream or cry--not once--hear me--speak to me--tell
me what I have done!'

'You know, you she devil!' returned the robber, suppressing his breath.
'You were watched to-night; every word you said was heard.'

'Then spare my life for the love of Heaven, as I spared yours,'
rejoined the girl, clinging to him.  'Bill, dear Bill, you cannot have
the heart to kill me.  Oh! think of all I have given up, only this one
night, for you.  You _shall_ have time to think, and save yourself this
crime; I will not loose my hold, you cannot throw me off.  Bill, Bill,
for dear God's sake, for your own, for mine, stop before you spill my
blood!  I have been true to you, upon my guilty soul I have!'

The man struggled violently, to release his arms; but those of the girl
were clasped round his, and tear her as he would, he could not tear
them away.

'Bill,' cried the girl, striving to lay her head upon his breast, 'the
gentleman and that dear lady, told me to-night of a home in some
foreign country where I could end my days in solitude and peace.  Let
me see them again, and beg them, on my knees, to show the same mercy
and goodness to you; and let us both leave this dreadful place, and far
apart lead better lives, and forget how we have lived, except in
prayers, and never see each other more. It is never too late to repent.
They told me so--I feel it now--but we must have time--a little, little
time!'

The housebreaker freed one arm, and grasped his pistol. The certainty
of immediate detection if he fired, flashed across his mind even in the
midst of his fury; and he beat it twice with all the force he could
summon, upon the upturned face that almost touched his own.

She staggered and fell:  nearly blinded with the blood that rained down
from a deep gash in her forehead; but raising herself, with difficulty,
on her knees, drew from her bosom a white handkerchief--Rose Maylie's
own--and holding it up, in her folded hands, as high towards Heaven as
her feeble strength would allow, breathed one prayer for mercy to her
Maker.

It was a ghastly figure to look upon.  The murderer staggering backward
to the wall, and shutting out the sight with his hand, seized a heavy
club and struck her down.



CHAPTER XLVIII

THE FLIGHT OF SIKES

Of all bad deeds that, under cover of the darkness, had been committed
within wide London's bounds since night hung over it, that was the
worst.  Of all the horrors that rose with an ill scent upon the morning
air, that was the foulest and most cruel.

The sun--the bright sun, that brings back, not light alone, but new
life, and hope, and freshness to man--burst upon the crowded city in
clear and radiant glory.  Through costly-coloured glass and
paper-mended window, through cathedral dome and rotten crevice, it shed
its equal ray.  It lighted up the room where the murdered woman lay.
It did.  He tried to shut it out, but it would stream in.  If the sight
had been a ghastly one in the dull morning, what was it, now, in all
that brilliant light!

He had not moved; he had been afraid to stir.  There had been a moan
and motion of the hand; and, with terror added to rage, he had struck
and struck again.  Once he threw a rug over it; but it was worse to
fancy the eyes, and imagine them moving towards him, than to see them
glaring upward, as if watching the reflection of the pool of gore that
quivered and danced in the sunlight on the ceiling.  He had plucked it
off again.  And there was the body--mere flesh and blood, no more--but
such flesh, and so much blood!

He struck a light, kindled a fire, and thrust the club into it. There
was hair upon the end, which blazed and shrunk into a light cinder,
and, caught by the air, whirled up the chimney.  Even that frightened
him, sturdy as he was; but he held the weapon till it broke, and then
piled it on the coals to burn away, and smoulder into ashes.  He washed
himself, and rubbed his clothes; there were spots that would not be
removed, but he cut the pieces out, and burnt them.  How those stains
were dispersed about the room!  The very feet of the dog were bloody.

All this time he had, never once, turned his back upon the corpse; no,
not for a moment.  Such preparations completed, he moved, backward,
towards the door:  dragging the dog with him, lest he should soil his
feet anew and carry out new evidence of the crime into the streets. He
shut the door softly, locked it, took the key, and left the house.

He crossed over, and glanced up at the window, to be sure that nothing
was visible from the outside.  There was the curtain still drawn, which
she would have opened to admit the light she never saw again.  It lay
nearly under there.  _He_ knew that.  God, how the sun poured down upon
the very spot!

The glance was instantaneous.  It was a relief to have got free of the
room.  He whistled on the dog, and walked rapidly away.

He went through Islington; strode up the hill at Highgate on which
stands the stone in honour of Whittington; turned down to Highgate
Hill, unsteady of purpose, and uncertain where to go; struck off to the
right again, almost as soon as he began to descend it; and taking the
foot-path across the fields, skirted Caen Wood, and so came on
Hampstead Heath.  Traversing the hollow by the Vale of Heath, he
mounted the opposite bank, and crossing the road which joins the
villages of Hampstead and Highgate, made along the remaining portion of
the heath to the fields at North End, in one of which he laid himself
down under a hedge, and slept.

Soon he was up again, and away,--not far into the country, but back
towards London by the high-road--then back again--then over another
part of the same ground as he already traversed--then wandering up and
down in fields, and lying on ditches' brinks to rest, and starting up
to make for some other spot, and do the same, and ramble on again.

Where could he go, that was near and not too public, to get some meat
and drink?  Hendon.  That was a good place, not far off, and out of
most people's way.  Thither he directed his steps,--running sometimes,
and sometimes, with a strange perversity, loitering at a snail's pace,
or stopping altogether and idly breaking the hedges with a stick.  But
when he got there, all the people he met--the very children at the
doors--seemed to view him with suspicion.  Back he turned again,
without the courage to purchase bit or drop, though he had tasted no
food for many hours; and once more he lingered on the Heath, uncertain
where to go.

He wandered over miles and miles of ground, and still came back to the
old place.  Morning and noon had passed, and the day was on the wane,
and still he rambled to and fro, and up and down, and round and round,
and still lingered about the same spot.  At last he got away, and
shaped his course for Hatfield.

It was nine o'clock at night, when the man, quite tired out, and the
dog, limping and lame from the unaccustomed exercise, turned down the
hill by the church of the quiet village, and plodding along the little
street, crept into a small public-house, whose scanty light had guided
them to the spot.  There was a fire in the tap-room, and some
country-labourers were drinking before it.

They made room for the stranger, but he sat down in the furthest
corner, and ate and drank alone, or rather with his dog:  to whom he
cast a morsel of food from time to time.

The conversation of the men assembled here, turned upon the
neighbouring land, and farmers; and when those topics were exhausted,
upon the age of some old man who had been buried on the previous
Sunday; the young men present considering him very old, and the old men
present declaring him to have been quite young--not older, one
white-haired grandfather said, than he was--with ten or fifteen year of
life in him at least--if he had taken care; if he had taken care.

There was nothing to attract attention, or excite alarm in this. The
robber, after paying his reckoning, sat silent and unnoticed in his
corner, and had almost dropped asleep, when he was half wakened by the
noisy entrance of a new comer.

This was an antic fellow, half pedlar and half mountebank, who
travelled about the country on foot to vend hones, strops, razors,
washballs, harness-paste, medicine for dogs and horses, cheap
perfumery, cosmetics, and such-like wares, which he carried in a case
slung to his back.  His entrance was the signal for various homely
jokes with the countrymen, which slackened not until he had made his
supper, and opened his box of treasures, when he ingeniously contrived
to unite business with amusement.

'And what be that stoof?  Good to eat, Harry?' asked a grinning
countryman, pointing to some composition-cakes in one corner.

'This,' said the fellow, producing one, 'this is the infallible and
invaluable composition for removing all sorts of stain, rust, dirt,
mildew, spick, speck, spot, or spatter, from silk, satin, linen,
cambric, cloth, crape, stuff, carpet, merino, muslin, bombazeen, or
woollen stuff.  Wine-stains, fruit-stains, beer-stains, water-stains,
paint-stains, pitch-stains, any stains, all come out at one rub with
the infallible and invaluable composition.  If a lady stains her
honour, she has only need to swallow one cake and she's cured at
once--for it's poison.  If a gentleman wants to prove this, he has only
need to bolt one little square, and he has put it beyond question--for
it's quite as satisfactory as a pistol-bullet, and a great deal nastier
in the flavour, consequently the more credit in taking it.  One penny a
square.  With all these virtues, one penny a square!'

There were two buyers directly, and more of the listeners plainly
hesitated.  The vendor observing this, increased in loquacity.

'It's all bought up as fast as it can be made,' said the fellow. 'There
are fourteen water-mills, six steam-engines, and a galvanic battery,
always a-working upon it, and they can't make it fast enough, though
the men work so hard that they die off, and the widows is pensioned
directly, with twenty pound a-year for each of the children, and a
premium of fifty for twins.  One penny a square!  Two half-pence is all
the same, and four farthings is received with joy.  One penny a square!
Wine-stains, fruit-stains, beer-stains, water-stains, paint-stains,
pitch-stains, mud-stains, blood-stains!  Here is a stain upon the hat
of a gentleman in company, that I'll take clean out, before he can
order me a pint of ale.'

'Hah!' cried Sikes starting up.  'Give that back.'

'I'll take it clean out, sir,' replied the man, winking to the company,
'before you can come across the room to get it. Gentlemen all, observe
the dark stain upon this gentleman's hat, no wider than a shilling, but
thicker than a half-crown.  Whether it is a wine-stain, fruit-stain,
beer-stain, water-stain, paint-stain, pitch-stain, mud-stain, or
blood-stain--'

The man got no further, for Sikes with a hideous imprecation overthrew
the table, and tearing the hat from him, burst out of the house.

With the same perversity of feeling and irresolution that had fastened
upon him, despite himself, all day, the murderer, finding that he was
not followed, and that they most probably considered him some drunken
sullen fellow, turned back up the town, and getting out of the glare of
the lamps of a stage-coach that was standing in the street, was walking
past, when he recognised the mail from London, and saw that it was
standing at the little post-office.  He almost knew what was to come;
but he crossed over, and listened.

The guard was standing at the door, waiting for the letter-bag. A man,
dressed like a game-keeper, came up at the moment, and he handed him a
basket which lay ready on the pavement.

'That's for your people,' said the guard.  'Now, look alive in there,
will you.  Damn that 'ere bag, it warn't ready night afore last; this
won't do, you know!'

'Anything new up in town, Ben?' asked the game-keeper, drawing back to
the window-shutters, the better to admire the horses.

'No, nothing that I knows on,' replied the man, pulling on his gloves.
'Corn's up a little.  I heerd talk of a murder, too, down Spitalfields
way, but I don't reckon much upon it.'

'Oh, that's quite true,' said a gentleman inside, who was looking out
of the window.  'And a dreadful murder it was.'

'Was it, sir?' rejoined the guard, touching his hat.  'Man or woman,
pray, sir?'

'A woman,' replied the gentleman.  'It is supposed--'

'Now, Ben,' replied the coachman impatiently.

'Damn that 'ere bag,' said the guard; 'are you gone to sleep in there?'

'Coming!' cried the office keeper, running out.

'Coming,' growled the guard.  'Ah, and so's the young 'ooman of
property that's going to take a fancy to me, but I don't know when.
Here, give hold.  All ri--ight!'

The horn sounded a few cheerful notes, and the coach was gone.

Sikes remained standing in the street, apparently unmoved by what he
had just heard, and agitated by no stronger feeling than a doubt where
to go.  At length he went back again, and took the road which leads
from Hatfield to St. Albans.

He went on doggedly; but as he left the town behind him, and plunged
into the solitude and darkness of the road, he felt a dread and awe
creeping upon him which shook him to the core. Every object before him,
substance or shadow, still or moving, took the semblance of some
fearful thing; but these fears were nothing compared to the sense that
haunted him of that morning's ghastly figure following at his heels.
He could trace its shadow in the gloom, supply the smallest item of the
outline, and note how stiff and solemn it seemed to stalk along.  He
could hear its garments rustling in the leaves, and every breath of
wind came laden with that last low cry.  If he stopped it did the same.
If he ran, it followed--not running too:  that would have been a
relief:  but like a corpse endowed with the mere machinery of life, and
borne on one slow melancholy wind that never rose or fell.

At times, he turned, with desperate determination, resolved to beat
this phantom off, though it should look him dead; but the hair rose on
his head, and his blood stood still, for it had turned with him and was
behind him then.  He had kept it before him that morning, but it was
behind now--always.  He leaned his back against a bank, and felt that
it stood above him, visibly out against the cold night-sky.  He threw
himself upon the road--on his back upon the road.  At his head it
stood, silent, erect, and still--a living grave-stone, with its epitaph
in blood.

Let no man talk of murderers escaping justice, and hint that Providence
must sleep.  There were twenty score of violent deaths in one long
minute of that agony of fear.

There was a shed in a field he passed, that offered shelter for the
night.  Before the door, were three tall poplar trees, which made it
very dark within; and the wind moaned through them with a dismal wail.
He _could not_ walk on, till daylight came again; and here he stretched
himself close to the wall--to undergo new torture.

For now, a vision came before him, as constant and more terrible than
that from which he had escaped.  Those widely staring eyes, so
lustreless and so glassy, that he had better borne to see them than
think upon them, appeared in the midst of the darkness: light in
themselves, but giving light to nothing.  There were but two, but they
were everywhere.  If he shut out the sight, there came the room with
every well-known object--some, indeed, that he would have forgotten, if
he had gone over its contents from memory--each in its accustomed
place.  The body was in _its_ place, and its eyes were as he saw them
when he stole away.  He got up, and rushed into the field without.  The
figure was behind him. He re-entered the shed, and shrunk down once
more.  The eyes were there, before he had laid himself along.

And here he remained in such terror as none but he can know, trembling
in every limb, and the cold sweat starting from every pore, when
suddenly there arose upon the night-wind the noise of distant shouting,
and the roar of voices mingled in alarm and wonder.  Any sound of men
in that lonely place, even though it conveyed a real cause of alarm,
was something to him.  He regained his strength and energy at the
prospect of personal danger; and springing to his feet, rushed into the
open air.

The broad sky seemed on fire.  Rising into the air with showers of
sparks, and rolling one above the other, were sheets of flame, lighting
the atmosphere for miles round, and driving clouds of smoke in the
direction where he stood.  The shouts grew louder as new voices swelled
the roar, and he could hear the cry of Fire! mingled with the ringing
of an alarm-bell, the fall of heavy bodies, and the crackling of flames
as they twined round some new obstacle, and shot aloft as though
refreshed by food.  The noise increased as he looked.  There were
people there--men and women--light, bustle.  It was like new life to
him.  He darted onward--straight, headlong--dashing through brier and
brake, and leaping gate and fence as madly as his dog, who careered
with loud and sounding bark before him.

He came upon the spot.  There were half-dressed figures tearing to and
fro, some endeavouring to drag the frightened horses from the stables,
others driving the cattle from the yard and out-houses, and others
coming laden from the burning pile, amidst a shower of falling sparks,
and the tumbling down of red-hot beams.  The apertures, where doors and
windows stood an hour ago, disclosed a mass of raging fire; walls
rocked and crumbled into the burning well; the molten lead and iron
poured down, white hot, upon the ground.  Women and children shrieked,
and men encouraged each other with noisy shouts and cheers.  The
clanking of the engine-pumps, and the spirting and hissing of the water
as it fell upon the blazing wood, added to the tremendous roar.  He
shouted, too, till he was hoarse; and flying from memory and himself,
plunged into the thickest of the throng.  Hither and thither he dived
that night:  now working at the pumps, and now hurrying through the
smoke and flame, but never ceasing to engage himself wherever noise and
men were thickest.  Up and down the ladders, upon the roofs of
buildings, over floors that quaked and trembled with his weight, under
the lee of falling bricks and stones, in every part of that great fire
was he; but he bore a charmed life, and had neither scratch nor bruise,
nor weariness nor thought, till morning dawned again, and only smoke
and blackened ruins remained.

This mad excitement over, there returned, with ten-fold force, the
dreadful consciousness of his crime.  He looked suspiciously about him,
for the men were conversing in groups, and he feared to be the subject
of their talk.  The dog obeyed the significant beck of his finger, and
they drew off, stealthily, together.  He passed near an engine where
some men were seated, and they called to him to share in their
refreshment.  He took some bread and meat; and as he drank a draught of
beer, heard the firemen, who were from London, talking about the
murder.  'He has gone to Birmingham, they say,' said one:  'but they'll
have him yet, for the scouts are out, and by to-morrow night there'll
be a cry all through the country.'

He hurried off, and walked till he almost dropped upon the ground; then
lay down in a lane, and had a long, but broken and uneasy sleep.  He
wandered on again, irresolute and undecided, and oppressed with the
fear of another solitary night.

Suddenly, he took the desperate resolution to going back to London.

'There's somebody to speak to there, at all event,' he thought. 'A good
hiding-place, too.  They'll never expect to nab me there, after this
country scent.  Why can't I lie by for a week or so, and, forcing blunt
from Fagin, get abroad to France?  Damme, I'll risk it.'

He acted upon this impulse without delay, and choosing the least
frequented roads began his journey back, resolved to lie concealed
within a short distance of the metropolis, and, entering it at dusk by
a circuitous route, to proceed straight to that part of it which he had
fixed on for his destination.

The dog, though.  If any description of him were out, it would not be
forgotten that the dog was missing, and had probably gone with him.
This might lead to his apprehension as he passed along the streets.  He
resolved to drown him, and walked on, looking about for a pond:
picking up a heavy stone and tying it to his handkerchief as he went.

The animal looked up into his master's face while these preparations
were making; whether his instinct apprehended something of their
purpose, or the robber's sidelong look at him was sterner than
ordinary, he skulked a little farther in the rear than usual, and
cowered as he came more slowly along.  When his master halted at the
brink of a pool, and looked round to call him, he stopped outright.

'Do you hear me call?  Come here!' cried Sikes.

The animal came up from the very force of habit; but as Sikes stooped
to attach the handkerchief to his throat, he uttered a low growl and
started back.

'Come back!' said the robber.

The dog wagged his tail, but moved not.  Sikes made a running noose and
called him again.

The dog advanced, retreated, paused an instant, and scoured away at his
hardest speed.

The man whistled again and again, and sat down and waited in the
expectation that he would return.  But no dog appeared, and at length
he resumed his journey.



CHAPTER XLIX

MONKS AND MR. BROWNLOW AT LENGTH MEET.  THEIR CONVERSATION, AND THE
INTELLIGENCE THAT INTERRUPTS IT

 The twilight was beginning to close in, when Mr. Brownlow
alighted from a hackney-coach at his own door, and knocked softly.  The
door being opened, a sturdy man got out of the coach and stationed
himself on one side of the steps, while another man, who had been
seated on the box, dismounted too, and stood upon the other side.  At a
sign from Mr. Brownlow, they helped out a third man, and taking him
between them, hurried him into the house. This man was Monks.

They walked in the same manner up the stairs without speaking, and Mr.
Brownlow, preceding them, led the way into a back-room. At the door of
this apartment, Monks, who had ascended with evident reluctance,
stopped.  The two men looked at the old gentleman as if for
instructions.

'He knows the alternative,' said Mr. Browlow.  'If he hesitates or
moves a finger but as you bid him, drag him into the street, call for
the aid of the police, and impeach him as a felon in my name.'

'How dare you say this of me?' asked Monks.

'How dare you urge me to it, young man?' replied Mr. Brownlow,
confronting him with a steady look.  'Are you mad enough to leave this
house?  Unhand him.  There, sir. You are free to go, and we to follow.
But I warn you, by all I hold most solemn and most sacred, that instant
will have you apprehended on a charge of fraud and robbery.  I am
resolute and immoveable.  If you are determined to be the same, your
blood be upon your own head!'

'By what authority am I kidnapped in the street, and brought here by
these dogs?' asked Monks, looking from one to the other of the men who
stood beside him.

'By mine,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'Those persons are indemnified by me.
If you complain of being deprived of your liberty--you had power and
opportunity to retrieve it as you came along, but you deemed it
advisable to remain quiet--I say again, throw yourself for protection
on the law.  I will appeal to the law too; but when you have gone too
far to recede, do not sue to me for leniency, when the power will have
passed into other hands; and do not say I plunged you down the gulf
into which you rushed, yourself.'

Monks was plainly disconcerted, and alarmed besides.  He hesitated.

'You will decide quickly,' said Mr. Brownlow, with perfect firmness and
composure.  'If you wish me to prefer my charges publicly, and consign
you to a punishment the extent of which, although I can, with a
shudder, foresee, I cannot control, once more, I say, for you know the
way.  If not, and you appeal to my forbearance, and the mercy of those
you have deeply injured, seat yourself, without a word, in that chair.
It has waited for you two whole days.'

Monks muttered some unintelligible words, but wavered still.

'You will be prompt,' said Mr. Brownlow.  'A word from me, and the
alternative has gone for ever.'

Still the man hesitated.

'I have not the inclination to parley,' said Mr. Brownlow, 'and, as I
advocate the dearest interests of others, I have not the right.'

'Is there--' demanded Monks with a faltering tongue,--'is there--no
middle course?'

'None.'

Monks looked at the old gentleman, with an anxious eye; but, reading in
his countenance nothing but severity and determination, walked into the
room, and, shrugging his shoulders, sat down.

'Lock the door on the outside,' said Mr. Brownlow to the attendants,
'and come when I ring.'

The men obeyed, and the two were left alone together.

'This is pretty treatment, sir,' said Monks, throwing down his hat and
cloak, 'from my father's oldest friend.'

'It is because I was your father's oldest friend, young man,' returned
Mr. Brownlow; 'it is because the hopes and wishes of young and happy
years were bound up with him, and that fair creature of his blood and
kindred who rejoined her God in youth, and left me here a solitary,
lonely man:  it is because he knelt with me beside his only sisters's
death-bed when he was yet a boy, on the morning that would--but Heaven
willed otherwise--have made her my young wife; it is because my seared
heart clung to him, from that time forth, through all his trials and
errors, till he died; it is because old recollections and associations
filled my heart, and even the sight of you brings with it old thoughts
of him; it is because of all these things that I am moved to treat you
gently now--yes, Edward Leeford, even now--and blush for your
unworthiness who bear the name.'

'What has the name to do with it?' asked the other, after
contemplating, half in silence, and half in dogged wonder, the
agitation of his companion.  'What is the name to me?'

'Nothing,' replied Mr. Brownlow, 'nothing to you.  But it was _hers_,
and even at this distance of time brings back to me, an old man, the
glow and thrill which I once felt, only to hear it repeated by a
stranger.  I am very glad you have changed it--very--very.'

'This is all mighty fine,' said Monks (to retain his assumed
designation) after a long silence, during which he had jerked himself
in sullen defiance to and fro, and Mr. Brownlow had sat, shading his
face with his hand. 'But what do you want with me?'

'You have a brother,' said Mr. Brownlow, rousing himself:  'a brother,
the whisper of whose name in your ear when I came behind you in the
street, was, in itself, almost enough to make you accompany me hither,
in wonder and alarm.'

'I have no brother,' replied Monks.  'You know I was an only child.
Why do you talk to me of brothers?  You know that, as well as I.'

'Attend to what I do know, and you may not,' said Mr. Brownlow. 'I
shall interest you by and by.  I know that of the wretched marriage,
into which family pride, and the most sordid and narrowest of all
ambition, forced your unhappy father when a mere boy, you were the sole
and most unnatural issue.'

'I don't care for hard names,' interrupted Monks with a jeering laugh.
'You know the fact, and that's enough for me.'

'But I also know,' pursued the old gentleman, 'the misery, the slow
torture, the protracted anguish of that ill-assorted union. I know how
listlessly and wearily each of that wretched pair dragged on their
heavy chain through a world that was poisoned to them both.  I know how
cold formalities were succeeded by open taunts; how indifference gave
place to dislike, dislike to hate, and hate to loathing, until at last
they wrenched the clanking bond asunder, and retiring a wide space
apart, carried each a galling fragment, of which nothing but death
could break the rivets, to hide it in new society beneath the gayest
looks they could assume.  Your mother succeeded; she forgot it soon.
But it rusted and cankered at your father's heart for years.'

'Well, they were separated,' said Monks, 'and what of that?'

'When they had been separated for some time,' returned Mr. Brownlow,
'and your mother, wholly given up to continental frivolities, had
utterly forgotten the young husband ten good years her junior, who,
with prospects blighted, lingered on at home, he fell among new
friends.  This circumstance, at least, you know already.'

'Not I,' said Monks, turning away his eyes and beating his foot upon
the ground, as a man who is determined to deny everything. 'Not I.'

'Your manner, no less than your actions, assures me that you have never
forgotten it, or ceased to think of it with bitterness,' returned Mr.
Brownlow.  'I speak of fifteen years ago, when you were not more than
eleven years old, and your father but one-and-thirty--for he was, I
repeat, a boy, when _his_ father ordered him to marry. Must I go back
to events which cast a shade upon the memory of your parent, or will
you spare it, and disclose to me the truth?'

'I have nothing to disclose,' rejoined Monks.  'You must talk on if you
will.'

'These new friends, then,' said Mr. Brownlow, 'were a naval officer
retired from active service, whose wife had died some half-a-year
before, and left him with two children--there had been more, but, of
all their family, happily but two survived. They were both daughters;
one a beautiful creature of nineteen, and the other a mere child of two
or three years old.'

'What's this to me?' asked Monks.

'They resided,' said Mr. Brownlow, without seeming to hear the
interruption, 'in a part of the country to which your father in his
wandering had repaired, and where he had taken up his abode.
Acquaintance, intimacy, friendship, fast followed on each other. Your
father was gifted as few men are.  He had his sister's soul and person.
As the old officer knew him more and more, he grew to love him.  I
would that it had ended there.  His daughter did the same.'

The old gentleman paused; Monks was biting his lips, with his eyes
fixed upon the floor; seeing this, he immediately resumed:

'The end of a year found him contracted, solemnly contracted, to that
daughter; the object of the first, true, ardent, only passion of a
guileless girl.'

'Your tale is of the longest,' observed Monks, moving restlessly in his
chair.

'It is a true tale of grief and trial, and sorrow, young man,' returned
Mr. Brownlow, 'and such tales usually are; if it were one of unmixed
joy and happiness, it would be very brief.  At length one of those rich
relations to strengthen whose interest and importance your father had
been sacrificed, as others are often--it is no uncommon case--died, and
to repair the misery he had been instrumental in occasioning, left him
his panacea for all griefs--Money.  It was necessary that he should
immediately repair to Rome, whither this man had sped for health, and
where he had died, leaving his affairs in great confusion.  He went;
was seized with mortal illness there; was followed, the moment the
intelligence reached Paris, by your mother who carried you with her; he
died the day after her arrival, leaving no will--_no will_--so that the
whole property fell to her and you.'

At this part of the recital Monks held his breath, and listened with a
face of intense eagerness, though his eyes were not directed towards
the speaker.  As Mr. Brownlow paused, he changed his position with the
air of one who has experienced a sudden relief, and wiped his hot face
and hands.

'Before he went abroad, and as he passed through London on his way,'
said Mr. Brownlow, slowly, and fixing his eyes upon the other's face,
'he came to me.'

'I never heard of that,' interrupted Monks in a tone intended to appear
incredulous, but savouring more of disagreeable surprise.

'He came to me, and left with me, among some other things, a picture--a
portrait painted by himself--a likeness of this poor girl--which he did
not wish to leave behind, and could not carry forward on his hasty
journey.  He was worn by anxiety and remorse almost to a shadow; talked
in a wild, distracted way, of ruin and dishonour worked by himself;
confided to me his intention to convert his whole property, at any
loss, into money, and, having settled on his wife and you a portion of
his recent acquisition, to fly the country--I guessed too well he would
not fly alone--and never see it more.  Even from me, his old and early
friend, whose strong attachment had taken root in the earth that
covered one most dear to both--even from me he withheld any more
particular confession, promising to write and tell me all, and after
that to see me once again, for the last time on earth. Alas!  _That_
was the last time.  I had no letter, and I never saw him more.'

'I went,' said Mr. Brownlow, after a short pause, 'I went, when all was
over, to the scene of his--I will use the term the world would freely
use, for worldly harshness or favour are now alike to him--of his
guilty love, resolved that if my fears were realised that erring child
should find one heart and home to shelter and compassionate her.  The
family had left that part a week before; they had called in such
trifling debts as were outstanding, discharged them, and left the place
by night.  Why, or whither, none can tell.'

Monks drew his breath yet more freely, and looked round with a smile of
triumph.

'When your brother,' said Mr. Brownlow, drawing nearer to the other's
chair, 'When your brother:  a feeble, ragged, neglected child:  was
cast in my way by a stronger hand than chance, and rescued by me from a
life of vice and infamy--'

'What?' cried Monks.

'By me,' said Mr. Brownlow.  'I told you I should interest you before
long.  I say by me--I see that your cunning associate suppressed my
name, although for ought he knew, it would be quite strange to your
ears.  When he was rescued by me, then, and lay recovering from
sickness in my house, his strong resemblance to this picture I have
spoken of, struck me with astonishment.  Even when I first saw him in
all his dirt and misery, there was a lingering expression in his face
that came upon me like a glimpse of some old friend flashing on one in
a vivid dream.  I need not tell you he was snared away before I knew
his history--'

'Why not?' asked Monks hastily.

'Because you know it well.'

'I!'

'Denial to me is vain,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'I shall show you that I
know more than that.'

'You--you--can't prove anything against me,' stammered Monks.  'I defy
you to do it!'

'We shall see,' returned the old gentleman with a searching glance.  'I
lost the boy, and no efforts of mine could recover him.  Your mother
being dead, I knew that you alone could solve the mystery if anybody
could, and as when I had last heard of you you were on your own estate
in the West Indies--whither, as you well know, you retired upon your
mother's death to escape the consequences of vicious courses here--I
made the voyage.  You had left it, months before, and were supposed to
be in London, but no one could tell where.  I returned.  Your agents
had no clue to your residence.  You came and went, they said, as
strangely as you had ever done:  sometimes for days together and
sometimes not for months:  keeping to all appearance the same low
haunts and mingling with the same infamous herd who had been your
associates when a fierce ungovernable boy.  I wearied them with new
applications.  I paced the streets by night and day, but until two
hours ago, all my efforts were fruitless, and I never saw you for an
instant.'

'And now you do see me,' said Monks, rising boldly, 'what then? Fraud
and robbery are high-sounding words--justified, you think, by a fancied
resemblance in some young imp to an idle daub of a dead man's Brother!
You don't even know that a child was born of this maudlin pair; you
don't even know that.'

'I _did not_,' replied Mr. Brownlow, rising too; 'but within the last
fortnight I have learnt it all.  You have a brother; you know it, and
him.  There was a will, which your mother destroyed, leaving the secret
and the gain to you at her own death.  It contained a reference to some
child likely to be the result of this sad connection, which child was
born, and accidentally encountered by you, when your suspicions were
first awakened by his resemblance to your father.  You repaired to the
place of his birth. There existed proofs--proofs long suppressed--of
his birth and parentage.  Those proofs were destroyed by you, and now,
in your own words to your accomplice the Jew, "_the only proofs of the
boy's identity lie at the bottom of the river, and the old hag that
received them from the mother is rotting in her coffin_." Unworthy son,
coward, liar,--you, who hold your councils with thieves and murderers
in dark rooms at night,--you, whose plots and wiles have brought a
violent death upon the head of one worth millions such as you,--you,
who from your cradle were gall and bitterness to your own father's
heart, and in whom all evil passions, vice, and profligacy, festered,
till they found a vent in a hideous disease which had made your face an
index even to your mind--you, Edward Leeford, do you still brave me!'

'No, no, no!' returned the coward, overwhelmed by these accumulated
charges.

'Every word!' cried the gentleman, 'every word that has passed between
you and this detested villain, is known to me.  Shadows on the wall
have caught your whispers, and brought them to my ear; the sight of the
persecuted child has turned vice itself, and given it the courage and
almost the attributes of virtue. Murder has been done, to which you
were morally if not really a party.'

'No, no,' interposed Monks.  'I--I knew nothing of that; I was going to
inquire the truth of the story when you overtook me.  I didn't know the
cause.  I thought it was a common quarrel.'

'It was the partial disclosure of your secrets,' replied Mr. Brownlow.
'Will you disclose the whole?'

'Yes, I will.'

'Set your hand to a statement of truth and facts, and repeat it before
witnesses?'

'That I promise too.'

'Remain quietly here, until such a document is drawn up, and proceed
with me to such a place as I may deem most advisable, for the purpose
of attesting it?'

'If you insist upon that, I'll do that also,' replied Monks.

'You must do more than that,' said Mr. Brownlow.  'Make restitution to
an innocent and unoffending child, for such he is, although the
offspring of a guilty and most miserable love.  You have not forgotten
the provisions of the will.  Carry them into execution so far as your
brother is concerned, and then go where you please.  In this world you
need meet no more.'

While Monks was pacing up and down, meditating with dark and evil looks
on this proposal and the possibilities of evading it:  torn by his
fears on the one hand and his hatred on the other:  the door was
hurriedly unlocked, and a gentleman (Mr. Losberne) entered the room in
violent agitation.

'The man will be taken,' he cried.  'He will be taken to-night!'

'The murderer?' asked Mr. Brownlow.

'Yes, yes,' replied the other.  'His dog has been seen lurking about
some old haunt, and there seems little doubt that his master either is,
or will be, there, under cover of the darkness.  Spies are hovering
about in every direction.  I have spoken to the men who are charged
with his capture, and they tell me he cannot escape.  A reward of a
hundred pounds is proclaimed by Government to-night.'

'I will give fifty more,' said Mr. Brownlow, 'and proclaim it with my
own lips upon the spot, if I can reach it.  Where is Mr. Maylie?'

'Harry?  As soon as he had seen your friend here, safe in a coach with
you, he hurried off to where he heard this,' replied the doctor, 'and
mounting his horse sallied forth to join the first party at some place
in the outskirts agreed upon between them.'

'Fagin,' said Mr. Brownlow; 'what of him?'

'When I last heard, he had not been taken, but he will be, or is, by
this time.  They're sure of him.'

'Have you made up your mind?' asked Mr. Brownlow, in a low voice, of
Monks.

'Yes,' he replied.  'You--you--will be secret with me?'

'I will.  Remain here till I return.  It is your only hope of safety.'

They left the room, and the door was again locked.

'What have you done?' asked the doctor in a whisper.

'All that I could hope to do, and even more.  Coupling the poor girl's
intelligence with my previous knowledge, and the result of our good
friend's inquiries on the spot, I left him no loophole of escape, and
laid bare the whole villainy which by these lights became plain as day.
Write and appoint the evening after to-morrow, at seven, for the
meeting.  We shall be down there, a few hours before, but shall require
rest:  especially the young lady, who _may_ have greater need of
firmness than either you or I can quite foresee just now.  But my blood
boils to avenge this poor murdered creature.  Which way have they
taken?'

'Drive straight to the office and you will be in time,' replied Mr.
Losberne.  'I will remain here.'

The two gentlemen hastily separated; each in a fever of excitement
wholly uncontrollable.



CHAPTER L

THE PURSUIT AND ESCAPE

Near to that part of the Thames on which the church at Rotherhithe
abuts, where the buildings on the banks are dirtiest and the vessels on
the river blackest with the dust of colliers and the smoke of
close-built low-roofed houses, there exists the filthiest, the
strangest, the most extraordinary of the many localities that are
hidden in London, wholly unknown, even by name, to the great mass of
its inhabitants.

To reach this place, the visitor has to penetrate through a maze of
close, narrow, and muddy streets, thronged by the roughest and poorest
of waterside people, and devoted to the traffic they may be supposed to
occasion.  The cheapest and least delicate provisions are heaped in the
shops; the coarsest and commonest articles of wearing apparel dangle at
the salesman's door, and stream from the house-parapet and windows.
Jostling with unemployed labourers of the lowest class,
ballast-heavers, coal-whippers, brazen women, ragged children, and the
raff and refuse of the river, he makes his way with difficulty along,
assailed by offensive sights and smells from the narrow alleys which
branch off on the right and left, and deafened by the clash of
ponderous waggons that bear great piles of merchandise from the stacks
of warehouses that rise from every corner.  Arriving, at length, in
streets remoter and less-frequented than those through which he has
passed, he walks beneath tottering house-fronts projecting over the
pavement, dismantled walls that seem to totter as he passes, chimneys
half crushed half hesitating to fall, windows guarded by rusty iron
bars that time and dirt have almost eaten away, every imaginable sign
of desolation and neglect.

In such a neighborhood, beyond Dockhead in the Borough of Southwark,
stands Jacob's Island, surrounded by a muddy ditch, six or eight feet
deep and fifteen or twenty wide when the tide is in, once called Mill
Pond, but known in the days of this story as Folly Ditch.  It is a
creek or inlet from the Thames, and can always be filled at high water
by opening the sluices at the Lead Mills from which it took its old
name.  At such times, a stranger, looking from one of the wooden
bridges thrown across it at Mill Lane, will see the inhabitants of the
houses on either side lowering from their back doors and windows,
buckets, pails, domestic utensils of all kinds, in which to haul the
water up; and when his eye is turned from these operations to the
houses themselves, his utmost astonishment will be excited by the scene
before him.  Crazy wooden galleries common to the backs of half a dozen
houses, with holes from which to look upon the slime beneath; windows,
broken and patched, with poles thrust out, on which to dry the linen
that is never there; rooms so small, so filthy, so confined, that the
air would seem too tainted even for the dirt and squalor which they
shelter; wooden chambers thrusting themselves out above the mud, and
threatening to fall into it--as some have done; dirt-besmeared walls
and decaying foundations; every repulsive lineament of poverty, every
loathsome indication of filth, rot, and garbage; all these ornament the
banks of Folly Ditch.

In Jacob's Island, the warehouses are roofless and empty; the walls are
crumbling down; the windows are windows no more; the doors are falling
into the streets; the chimneys are blackened, but they yield no smoke.
Thirty or forty years ago, before losses and chancery suits came upon
it, it was a thriving place; but now it is a desolate island indeed.
The houses have no owners; they are broken open, and entered upon by
those who have the courage; and there they live, and there they die.
They must have powerful motives for a secret residence, or be reduced
to a destitute condition indeed, who seek a refuge in Jacob's Island.

In an upper room of one of these houses--a detached house of fair size,
ruinous in other respects, but strongly defended at door and window:
of which house the back commanded the ditch in manner already
described--there were assembled three men, who, regarding each other
every now and then with looks expressive of perplexity and expectation,
sat for some time in profound and gloomy silence.  One of these was
Toby Crackit, another Mr. Chitling, and the third a robber of fifty
years, whose nose had been almost beaten in, in some old scuffle, and
whose face bore a frightful scar which might probably be traced to the
same occasion.  This man was a returned transport, and his name was
Kags.

'I wish,' said Toby turning to Mr. Chitling, 'that you had picked out
some other crib when the two old ones got too warm, and had not come
here, my fine feller.'

'Why didn't you, blunder-head!' said Kags.

'Well, I thought you'd have been a little more glad to see me than
this,' replied Mr. Chitling, with a melancholy air.

'Why, look'e, young gentleman,' said Toby, 'when a man keeps himself so
very ex-clusive as I have done, and by that means has a snug house over
his head with nobody a prying and smelling about it, it's rather a
startling thing to have the honour of a wisit from a young gentleman
(however respectable and pleasant a person he may be to play cards with
at conweniency) circumstanced as you are.'

'Especially, when the exclusive young man has got a friend stopping
with him, that's arrived sooner than was expected from foreign parts,
and is too modest to want to be presented to the Judges on his return,'
added Mr. Kags.

There was a short silence, after which Toby Crackit, seeming to abandon
as hopeless any further effort to maintain his usual devil-may-care
swagger, turned to Chitling and said,

'When was Fagin took then?'

'Just at dinner-time--two o'clock this afternoon.  Charley and I made
our lucky up the wash-us chimney, and Bolter got into the empty
water-butt, head downwards; but his legs were so precious long that
they stuck out at the top, and so they took him too.'

'And Bet?'

'Poor Bet!  She went to see the Body, to speak to who it was,' replied
Chitling, his countenance falling more and more, 'and went off mad,
screaming and raving, and beating her head against the boards; so they
put a strait-weskut on her and took her to the hospital--and there she
is.'

'Wot's come of young Bates?' demanded Kags.

'He hung about, not to come over here afore dark, but he'll be here
soon,' replied Chitling.  'There's nowhere else to go to now, for the
people at the Cripples are all in custody, and the bar of the ken--I
went up there and see it with my own eyes--is filled with traps.'

'This is a smash,' observed Toby, biting his lips. 'There's more than
one will go with this.'

'The sessions are on,' said Kags:  'if they get the inquest over, and
Bolter turns King's evidence:  as of course he will, from what he's
said already:  they can prove Fagin an accessory before the fact, and
get the trial on on Friday, and he'll swing in six days from this, by
G--!'

'You should have heard the people groan,' said Chitling; 'the officers
fought like devils, or they'd have torn him away.  He was down once,
but they made a ring round him, and fought their way along.  You should
have seen how he looked about him, all muddy and bleeding, and clung to
them as if they were his dearest friends.  I can see 'em now, not able
to stand upright with the pressing of the mob, and draggin him along
amongst 'em; I can see the people jumping up, one behind another, and
snarling with their teeth and making at him; I can see the blood upon
his hair and beard, and hear the cries with which the women worked
themselves into the centre of the crowd at the street corner, and swore
they'd tear his heart out!'

The horror-stricken witness of this scene pressed his hands upon his
ears, and with his eyes closed got up and paced violently to and fro,
like one distracted.

While he was thus engaged, and the two men sat by in silence with their
eyes fixed upon the floor, a pattering noise was heard upon the stairs,
and Sikes's dog bounded into the room.  They ran to the window,
downstairs, and into the street.  The dog had jumped in at an open
window; he made no attempt to follow them, nor was his master to be
seen.

'What's the meaning of this?' said Toby when they had returned. 'He
can't be coming here.  I--I--hope not.'

'If he was coming here, he'd have come with the dog,' said Kags,
stooping down to examine the animal, who lay panting on the floor.
'Here!  Give us some water for him; he has run himself faint.'

'He's drunk it all up, every drop,' said Chitling after watching the
dog some time in silence.  'Covered with mud--lame--half blind--he must
have come a long way.'

'Where can he have come from!' exclaimed Toby.  'He's been to the other
kens of course, and finding them filled with strangers come on here,
where he's been many a time and often.  But where can he have come from
first, and how comes he here alone without the other!'

'He'--(none of them called the murderer by his old name)--'He can't
have made away with himself.  What do you think?' said Chitling.

Toby shook his head.

'If he had,' said Kags, 'the dog 'ud want to lead us away to where he
did it.  No.  I think he's got out of the country, and left the dog
behind.  He must have given him the slip somehow, or he wouldn't be so
easy.'

This solution, appearing the most probable one, was adopted as the
right; the dog, creeping under a chair, coiled himself up to sleep,
without more notice from anybody.

It being now dark, the shutter was closed, and a candle lighted and
placed upon the table.  The terrible events of the last two days had
made a deep impression on all three, increased by the danger and
uncertainty of their own position.  They drew their chairs closer
together, starting at every sound.  They spoke little, and that in
whispers, and were as silent and awe-stricken as if the remains of the
murdered woman lay in the next room.

They had sat thus, some time, when suddenly was heard a hurried
knocking at the door below.

'Young Bates,' said Kags, looking angrily round, to check the fear he
felt himself.

The knocking came again.  No, it wasn't he.  He never knocked like that.

Crackit went to the window, and shaking all over, drew in his head.
There was no need to tell them who it was; his pale face was enough.
The dog too was on the alert in an instant, and ran whining to the door.

'We must let him in,' he said, taking up the candle.

'Isn't there any help for it?' asked the other man in a hoarse voice.

'None.  He _must_ come in.'

'Don't leave us in the dark,' said Kags, taking down a candle from the
chimney-piece, and lighting it, with such a trembling hand that the
knocking was twice repeated before he had finished.

Crackit went down to the door, and returned followed by a man with the
lower part of his face buried in a handkerchief, and another tied over
his head under his hat.  He drew them slowly off.  Blanched face,
sunken eyes, hollow cheeks, beard of three days' growth, wasted flesh,
short thick breath; it was the very ghost of Sikes.

He laid his hand upon a chair which stood in the middle of the room,
but shuddering as he was about to drop into it, and seeming to glance
over his shoulder, dragged it back close to the wall--as close as it
would go--and ground it against it--and sat down.

Not a word had been exchanged.  He looked from one to another in
silence.  If an eye were furtively raised and met his, it was instantly
averted.  When his hollow voice broke silence, they all three started.
They seemed never to have heard its tones before.

'How came that dog here?' he asked.

'Alone.  Three hours ago.'

'To-night's paper says that Fagin's took.  Is it true, or a lie?'

'True.'

They were silent again.

'Damn you all!' said Sikes, passing his hand across his forehead.

'Have you nothing to say to me?'

There was an uneasy movement among them, but nobody spoke.

'You that keep this house,' said Sikes, turning his face to Crackit,
'do you mean to sell me, or to let me lie here till this hunt is over?'

'You may stop here, if you think it safe,' returned the person
addressed, after some hesitation.

Sikes carried his eyes slowly up the wall behind him:  rather trying to
turn his head than actually doing it:  and said, 'Is--it--the body--is
it buried?'

They shook their heads.

'Why isn't it!' he retorted with the same glance behind him. 'Wot do
they keep such ugly things above the ground for?--Who's that knocking?'

Crackit intimated, by a motion of his hand as he left the room, that
there was nothing to fear; and directly came back with Charley Bates
behind him.  Sikes sat opposite the door, so that the moment the boy
entered the room he encountered his figure.

'Toby,' said the boy falling back, as Sikes turned his eyes towards
him, 'why didn't you tell me this, downstairs?'

There had been something so tremendous in the shrinking off of the
three, that the wretched man was willing to propitiate even this lad.
Accordingly he nodded, and made as though he would shake hands with him.

'Let me go into some other room,' said the boy, retreating still
farther.

'Charley!' said Sikes, stepping forward.  'Don't you--don't you know
me?'

'Don't come nearer me,' answered the boy, still retreating, and
looking, with horror in his eyes, upon the murderer's face.  'You
monster!'

The man stopped half-way, and they looked at each other; but Sikes's
eyes sunk gradually to the ground.

'Witness you three,' cried the boy shaking his clenched fist, and
becoming more and more excited as he spoke. 'Witness you three--I'm not
afraid of him--if they come here after him, I'll give him up; I will.
I tell you out at once.  He may kill me for it if he likes, or if he
dares, but if I am here I'll give him up.  I'd give him up if he was to
be boiled alive.  Murder! Help!  If there's the pluck of a man among
you three, you'll help me.  Murder!  Help!  Down with him!'

Pouring out these cries, and accompanying them with violent
gesticulation, the boy actually threw himself, single-handed, upon the
strong man, and in the intensity of his energy and the suddenness of
his surprise, brought him heavily to the ground.

The three spectators seemed quite stupefied.  They offered no
interference, and the boy and man rolled on the ground together; the
former, heedless of the blows that showered upon him, wrenching his
hands tighter and tighter in the garments about the murderer's breast,
and never ceasing to call for help with all his might.

The contest, however, was too unequal to last long.  Sikes had him
down, and his knee was on his throat, when Crackit pulled him back with
a look of alarm, and pointed to the window.  There were lights gleaming
below, voices in loud and earnest conversation, the tramp of hurried
footsteps--endless they seemed in number--crossing the nearest wooden
bridge.  One man on horseback seemed to be among the crowd; for there
was the noise of hoofs rattling on the uneven pavement.  The gleam of
lights increased; the footsteps came more thickly and noisily on.
Then, came a loud knocking at the door, and then a hoarse murmur from
such a multitude of angry voices as would have made the boldest quail.

'Help!' shrieked the boy in a voice that rent the air.

'He's here!  Break down the door!'

'In the King's name,' cried the voices without; and the hoarse cry
arose again, but louder.

'Break down the door!' screamed the boy.  'I tell you they'll never
open it.  Run straight to the room where the light is. Break down the
door!'

Strokes, thick and heavy, rattled upon the door and lower
window-shutters as he ceased to speak, and a loud huzzah burst from the
crowd; giving the listener, for the first time, some adequate idea of
its immense extent.

'Open the door of some place where I can lock this screeching
Hell-babe,' cried Sikes fiercely; running to and fro, and dragging the
boy, now, as easily as if he were an empty sack. 'That door.  Quick!'
He flung him in, bolted it, and turned the key.  'Is the downstairs
door fast?'

'Double-locked and chained,' replied Crackit, who, with the other two
men, still remained quite helpless and bewildered.

'The panels--are they strong?'

'Lined with sheet-iron.'

'And the windows too?'

'Yes, and the windows.'

'Damn you!' cried the desperate ruffian, throwing up the sash and
menacing the crowd.  'Do your worst!  I'll cheat you yet!'

Of all the terrific yells that ever fell on mortal ears, none could
exceed the cry of the infuriated throng.  Some shouted to those who
were nearest to set the house on fire; others roared to the officers to
shoot him dead.  Among them all, none showed such fury as the man on
horseback, who, throwing himself out of the saddle, and bursting
through the crowd as if he were parting water, cried, beneath the
window, in a voice that rose above all others, 'Twenty guineas to the
man who brings a ladder!'

The nearest voices took up the cry, and hundreds echoed it.  Some
called for ladders, some for sledge-hammers; some ran with torches to
and fro as if to seek them, and still came back and roared again; some
spent their breath in impotent curses and execrations; some pressed
forward with the ecstasy of madmen, and thus impeded the progress of
those below; some among the boldest attempted to climb up by the
water-spout and crevices in the wall; and all waved to and fro, in the
darkness beneath, like a field of corn moved by an angry wind:  and
joined from time to time in one loud furious roar.

'The tide,' cried the murderer, as he staggered back into the room, and
shut the faces out, 'the tide was in as I came up. Give me a rope, a
long rope.  They're all in front.  I may drop into the Folly Ditch, and
clear off that way.  Give me a rope, or I shall do three more murders
and kill myself.'

The panic-stricken men pointed to where such articles were kept; the
murderer, hastily selecting the longest and strongest cord, hurried up
to the house-top.

All the window in the rear of the house had been long ago bricked up,
except one small trap in the room where the boy was locked, and that
was too small even for the passage of his body.  But, from this
aperture, he had never ceased to call on those without, to guard the
back; and thus, when the murderer emerged at last on the house-top by
the door in the roof, a loud shout proclaimed the fact to those in
front, who immediately began to pour round, pressing upon each other in
an unbroken stream.

He planted a board, which he had carried up with him for the purpose,
so firmly against the door that it must be matter of great difficulty
to open it from the inside; and creeping over the tiles, looked over
the low parapet.

The water was out, and the ditch a bed of mud.

The crowd had been hushed during these few moments, watching his
motions and doubtful of his purpose, but the instant they perceived it
and knew it was defeated, they raised a cry of triumphant execration to
which all their previous shouting had been whispers.  Again and again
it rose.  Those who were at too great a distance to know its meaning,
took up the sound; it echoed and re-echoed; it seemed as though the
whole city had poured its population out to curse him.

On pressed the people from the front--on, on, on, in a strong
struggling current of angry faces, with here and there a glaring torch
to lighten them up, and show them out in all their wrath and passion.
The houses on the opposite side of the ditch had been entered by the
mob; sashes were thrown up, or torn bodily out; there were tiers and
tiers of faces in every window; cluster upon cluster of people clinging
to every house-top.  Each little bridge (and there were three in sight)
bent beneath the weight of the crowd upon it.  Still the current poured
on to find some nook or hole from which to vent their shouts, and only
for an instant see the wretch.

'They have him now,' cried a man on the nearest bridge. 'Hurrah!'

The crowd grew light with uncovered heads; and again the shout uprose.

'I will give fifty pounds,' cried an old gentleman from the same
quarter, 'to the man who takes him alive.  I will remain here, till he
come to ask me for it.'

There was another roar.  At this moment the word was passed among the
crowd that the door was forced at last, and that he who had first
called for the ladder had mounted into the room.  The stream abruptly
turned, as this intelligence ran from mouth to mouth; and the people at
the windows, seeing those upon the bridges pouring back, quitted their
stations, and running into the street, joined the concourse that now
thronged pell-mell to the spot they had left:  each man crushing and
striving with his neighbor, and all panting with impatience to get near
the door, and look upon the criminal as the officers brought him out.
The cries and shrieks of those who were pressed almost to suffocation,
or trampled down and trodden under foot in the confusion, were
dreadful; the narrow ways were completely blocked up; and at this time,
between the rush of some to regain the space in front of the house, and
the unavailing struggles of others to extricate themselves from the
mass, the immediate attention was distracted from the murderer,
although the universal eagerness for his capture was, if possible,
increased.

The man had shrunk down, thoroughly quelled by the ferocity of the
crowd, and the impossibility of escape; but seeing this sudden change
with no less rapidity than it had occurred, he sprang upon his feet,
determined to make one last effort for his life by dropping into the
ditch, and, at the risk of being stifled, endeavouring to creep away in
the darkness and confusion.

Roused into new strength and energy, and stimulated by the noise within
the house which announced that an entrance had really been effected, he
set his foot against the stack of chimneys, fastened one end of the
rope tightly and firmly round it, and with the other made a strong
running noose by the aid of his hands and teeth almost in a second.  He
could let himself down by the cord to within a less distance of the
ground than his own height, and had his knife ready in his hand to cut
it then and drop.

At the very instant when he brought the loop over his head previous to
slipping it beneath his arm-pits, and when the old gentleman
before-mentioned (who had clung so tight to the railing of the bridge
as to resist the force of the crowd, and retain his position) earnestly
warned those about him that the man was about to lower himself down--at
that very instant the murderer, looking behind him on the roof, threw
his arms above his head, and uttered a yell of terror.

'The eyes again!' he cried in an unearthly screech.

Staggering as if struck by lightning, he lost his balance and tumbled
over the parapet.  The noose was on his neck. It ran up with his
weight, tight as a bow-string, and swift as the arrow it speeds.  He
fell for five-and-thirty feet.  There was a sudden jerk, a terrific
convulsion of the limbs; and there he hung, with the open knife
clenched in his stiffening hand.

The old chimney quivered with the shock, but stood it bravely. The
murderer swung lifeless against the wall; and the boy, thrusting aside
the dangling body which obscured his view, called to the people to come
and take him out, for God's sake.

A dog, which had lain concealed till now, ran backwards and forwards on
the parapet with a dismal howl, and collecting himself for a spring,
jumped for the dead man's shoulders. Missing his aim, he fell into the
ditch, turning completely over as he went; and striking his head
against a stone, dashed out his brains.



CHAPTER LI

AFFORDING AN EXPLANATION OF MORE MYSTERIES THAN ONE, AND COMPREHENDING
A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE WITH NO WORD OF SETTLEMENT OR PIN-MONEY

The events narrated in the last chapter were yet but two days old, when
Oliver found himself, at three o'clock in the afternoon, in a
travelling-carriage rolling fast towards his native town.  Mrs. Maylie,
and Rose, and Mrs. Bedwin, and the good doctor were with him:  and Mr.
Brownlow followed in a post-chaise, accompanied by one other person
whose name had not been mentioned.

They had not talked much upon the way; for Oliver was in a flutter of
agitation and uncertainty which deprived him of the power of collecting
his thoughts, and almost of speech, and appeared to have scarcely less
effect on his companions, who shared it, in at least an equal degree.
He and the two ladies had been very carefully made acquainted by Mr.
Brownlow with the nature of the admissions which had been forced from
Monks; and although they knew that the object of their present journey
was to complete the work which had been so well begun, still the whole
matter was enveloped in enough of doubt and mystery to leave them in
endurance of the most intense suspense.

The same kind friend had, with Mr. Losberne's assistance, cautiously
stopped all channels of communication through which they could receive
intelligence of the dreadful occurrences that so recently taken place.
'It was quite true,' he said, 'that they must know them before long,
but it might be at a better time than the present, and it could not be
at a worse.'  So, they travelled on in silence:  each busied with
reflections on the object which had brought them together:  and no one
disposed to give utterance to the thoughts which crowded upon all.

But if Oliver, under these influences, had remained silent while they
journeyed towards his birth-place by a road he had never seen, how the
whole current of his recollections ran back to old times, and what a
crowd of emotions were wakened up in his breast, when they turned into
that which he had traversed on foot:  a poor houseless, wandering boy,
without a friend to help him, or a roof to shelter his head.

'See there, there!' cried Oliver, eagerly clasping the hand of Rose,
and pointing out at the carriage window; 'that's the stile I came over;
there are the hedges I crept behind, for fear any one should overtake
me and force me back!  Yonder is the path across the fields, leading to
the old house where I was a little child!  Oh Dick, Dick, my dear old
friend, if I could only see you now!'

'You will see him soon,' replied Rose, gently taking his folded hands
between her own.  'You shall tell him how happy you are, and how rich
you have grown, and that in all your happiness you have none so great
as the coming back to make him happy too.'

'Yes, yes,' said Oliver, 'and we'll--we'll take him away from here, and
have him clothed and taught, and send him to some quiet country place
where he may grow strong and well,--shall we?'

Rose nodded 'yes,' for the boy was smiling through such happy tears
that she could not speak.

'You will be kind and good to him, for you are to every one,' said
Oliver.  'It will make you cry, I know, to hear what he can tell; but
never mind, never mind, it will be all over, and you will smile
again--I know that too--to think how changed he is; you did the same
with me.  He said "God bless you" to me when I ran away,' cried the boy
with a burst of affectionate emotion; 'and I will say "God bless you"
now, and show him how I love him for it!'

As they approached the town, and at length drove through its narrow
streets, it became matter of no small difficulty to restrain the boy
within reasonable bounds.  There was Sowerberry's the undertaker's just
as it used to be, only smaller and less imposing in appearance than he
remembered it--there were all the well-known shops and houses, with
almost every one of which he had some slight incident connected--there
was Gamfield's cart, the very cart he used to have, standing at the old
public-house door--there was the workhouse, the dreary prison of his
youthful days, with its dismal windows frowning on the street--there
was the same lean porter standing at the gate, at sight of whom Oliver
involuntarily shrunk back, and then laughed at himself for being so
foolish, then cried, then laughed again--there were scores of faces at
the doors and windows that he knew quite well--there was nearly
everything as if he had left it but yesterday, and all his recent life
had been but a happy dream.

But it was pure, earnest, joyful reality.  They drove straight to the
door of the chief hotel (which Oliver used to stare up at, with awe,
and think a mighty palace, but which had somehow fallen off in grandeur
and size); and here was Mr. Grimwig all ready to receive them, kissing
the young lady, and the old one too, when they got out of the coach, as
if he were the grandfather of the whole party, all smiles and kindness,
and not offering to eat his head--no, not once; not even when he
contradicted a very old postboy about the nearest road to London, and
maintained he knew it best, though he had only come that way once, and
that time fast asleep.  There was dinner prepared, and there were
bedrooms ready, and everything was arranged as if by magic.

Notwithstanding all this, when the hurry of the first half-hour was
over, the same silence and constraint prevailed that had marked their
journey down.  Mr. Brownlow did not join them at dinner, but remained
in a separate room.  The two other gentlemen hurried in and out with
anxious faces, and, during the short intervals when they were present,
conversed apart.  Once, Mrs. Maylie was called away, and after being
absent for nearly an hour, returned with eyes swollen with weeping.
All these things made Rose and Oliver, who were not in any new secrets,
nervous and uncomfortable.  They sat wondering, in silence; or, if they
exchanged a few words, spoke in whispers, as if they were afraid to
hear the sound of their own voices.

At length, when nine o'clock had come, and they began to think they
were to hear no more that night, Mr. Losberne and Mr. Grimwig entered
the room, followed by Mr. Brownlow and a man whom Oliver almost
shrieked with surprise to see; for they told him it was his brother,
and it was the same man he had met at the market-town, and seen looking
in with Fagin at the window of his little room.  Monks cast a look of
hate, which, even then, he could not dissemble, at the astonished boy,
and sat down near the door.  Mr. Brownlow, who had papers in his hand,
walked to a table near which Rose and Oliver were seated.

'This is a painful task,' said he, 'but these declarations, which have
been signed in London before many gentlemen, must be in substance
repeated here.  I would have spared you the degradation, but we must
hear them from your own lips before we part, and you know why.'

'Go on,' said the person addressed, turning away his face. 'Quick.  I
have almost done enough, I think.  Don't keep me here.'

'This child,' said Mr. Brownlow, drawing Oliver to him, and laying his
hand upon his head, 'is your half-brother; the illegitimate son of your
father, my dear friend Edwin Leeford, by poor young Agnes Fleming, who
died in giving him birth.'

'Yes,' said Monks, scowling at the trembling boy:  the beating of whose
heart he might have heard.  'That is the bastard child.'

'The term you use,' said Mr. Brownlow, sternly, 'is a reproach to those
long since passed beyond the feeble censure of the world. It reflects
disgrace on no one living, except you who use it. Let that pass.  He
was born in this town.'

'In the workhouse of this town,' was the sullen reply. 'You have the
story there.'  He pointed impatiently to the papers as he spoke.

'I must have it here, too,' said Mr. Brownlow, looking round upon the
listeners.

'Listen then!  You!' returned Monks.  'His father being taken ill at
Rome, was joined by his wife, my mother, from whom he had been long
separated, who went from Paris and took me with her--to look after his
property, for what I know, for she had no great affection for him, nor
he for her.  He knew nothing of us, for his senses were gone, and he
slumbered on till next day, when he died.  Among the papers in his
desk, were two, dated on the night his illness first came on, directed
to yourself'; he addressed himself to Mr. Brownlow; 'and enclosed in a
few short lines to you, with an intimation on the cover of the package
that it was not to be forwarded till after he was dead.  One of these
papers was a letter to this girl Agnes; the other a will.'

'What of the letter?' asked Mr. Brownlow.

'The letter?--A sheet of paper crossed and crossed again, with a
penitent confession, and prayers to God to help her.  He had palmed a
tale on the girl that some secret mystery--to be explained one
day--prevented his marrying her just then; and so she had gone on,
trusting patiently to him, until she trusted too far, and lost what
none could ever give her back.  She was, at that time, within a few
months of her confinement.  He told her all he had meant to do, to hide
her shame, if he had lived, and prayed her, if he died, not to curse
his memory, or think the consequences of their sin would be visited on
her or their young child; for all the guilt was his.  He reminded her
of the day he had given her the little locket and the ring with her
christian name engraved upon it, and a blank left for that which he
hoped one day to have bestowed upon her--prayed her yet to keep it, and
wear it next her heart, as she had done before--and then ran on,
wildly, in the same words, over and over again, as if he had gone
distracted.  I believe he had.'

'The will,' said Mr. Brownlow, as Oliver's tears fell fast.

Monks was silent.

'The will,' said Mr. Brownlow, speaking for him, 'was in the same
spirit as the letter.  He talked of miseries which his wife had brought
upon him; of the rebellious disposition, vice, malice, and premature
bad passions of you his only son, who had been trained to hate him; and
left you, and your mother, each an annuity of eight hundred pounds.
The bulk of his property he divided into two equal portions--one for
Agnes Fleming, and the other for their child, if it should be born
alive, and ever come of age.  If it were a girl, it was to inherit the
money unconditionally; but if a boy, only on the stipulation that in
his minority he should never have stained his name with any public act
of dishonour, meanness, cowardice, or wrong.  He did this, he said, to
mark his confidence in the other, and his conviction--only strengthened
by approaching death--that the child would share her gentle heart, and
noble nature.  If he were disappointed in this expectation, then the
money was to come to you:  for then, and not till then, when both
children were equal, would he recognise your prior claim upon his
purse, who had none upon his heart, but had, from an infant, repulsed
him with coldness and aversion.'

'My mother,' said Monks, in a louder tone, 'did what a woman should
have done.  She burnt this will.  The letter never reached its
destination; but that, and other proofs, she kept, in case they ever
tried to lie away the blot.  The girl's father had the truth from her
with every aggravation that her violent hate--I love her for it
now--could add.  Goaded by shame and dishonour he fled with his
children into a remote corner of Wales, changing his very name that his
friends might never know of his retreat; and here, no great while
afterwards, he was found dead in his bed.  The girl had left her home,
in secret, some weeks before; he had searched for her, on foot, in
every town and village near; it was on the night when he returned home,
assured that she had destroyed herself, to hide her shame and his, that
his old heart broke.'

There was a short silence here, until Mr. Brownlow took up the thread
of the narrative.

'Years after this,' he said, 'this man's--Edward Leeford's--mother came
to me.  He had left her, when only eighteen; robbed her of jewels and
money; gambled, squandered, forged, and fled to London:  where for two
years he had associated with the lowest outcasts.  She was sinking
under a painful and incurable disease, and wished to recover him before
she died.  Inquiries were set on foot, and strict searches made. They
were unavailing for a long time, but ultimately successful; and he went
back with her to France.'

'There she died,' said Monks, 'after a lingering illness; and, on her
death-bed, she bequeathed these secrets to me, together with her
unquenchable and deadly hatred of all whom they involved--though she
need not have left me that, for I had inherited it long before.  She
would not believe that the girl had destroyed herself, and the child
too, but was filled with the impression that a male child had been
born, and was alive.  I swore to her, if ever it crossed my path, to
hunt it down; never to let it rest; to pursue it with the bitterest and
most unrelenting animosity; to vent upon it the hatred that I deeply
felt, and to spit upon the empty vaunt of that insulting will by
draggin it, if I could, to the very gallows-foot.  She was right. He
came in my way at last.  I began well; and, but for babbling drabs, I
would have finished as I began!'

As the villain folded his arms tight together, and muttered curses on
himself in the impotence of baffled malice, Mr. Brownlow turned to the
terrified group beside him, and explained that the Jew, who had been
his old accomplice and confidant, had a large reward for keeping Oliver
ensnared:  of which some part was to be given up, in the event of his
being rescued:  and that a dispute on this head had led to their visit
to the country house for the purpose of identifying him.

'The locket and ring?' said Mr. Brownlow, turning to Monks.

'I bought them from the man and woman I told you of, who stole them
from the nurse, who stole them from the corpse,' answered Monks without
raising his eyes.  'You know what became of them.'

Mr. Brownlow merely nodded to Mr. Grimwig, who disappearing with great
alacrity, shortly returned, pushing in Mrs. Bumble, and dragging her
unwilling consort after him.

'Do my hi's deceive me!' cried Mr. Bumble, with ill-feigned enthusiasm,
'or is that little Oliver?  Oh O-li-ver, if you know'd how I've been
a-grieving for you--'

'Hold your tongue, fool,' murmured Mrs. Bumble.

'Isn't natur, natur, Mrs. Bumble?' remonstrated the workhouse master.
'Can't I be supposed to feel--_I_ as brought him up porochially--when I
see him a-setting here among ladies and gentlemen of the very affablest
description!  I always loved that boy as if he'd been my--my--my own
grandfather,' said Mr. Bumble, halting for an appropriate comparison.
'Master Oliver, my dear, you remember the blessed gentleman in the
white waistcoat?  Ah! he went to heaven last week, in a oak coffin with
plated handles, Oliver.'

'Come, sir,' said Mr. Grimwig, tartly; 'suppress your feelings.'

'I will do my endeavours, sir,' replied Mr. Bumble.  'How do you do,
sir?  I hope you are very well.'

This salutation was addressed to Mr. Brownlow, who had stepped up to
within a short distance of the respectable couple.  He inquired, as he
pointed to Monks,

'Do you know that person?'

'No,' replied Mrs. Bumble flatly.

'Perhaps _you_ don't?' said Mr. Brownlow, addressing her spouse.

'I never saw him in all my life,' said Mr. Bumble.

'Nor sold him anything, perhaps?'

'No,' replied Mrs. Bumble.

'You never had, perhaps, a certain gold locket and ring?' said Mr.
Brownlow.

'Certainly not,' replied the matron.  'Why are we brought here to
answer to such nonsense as this?'

Again Mr. Brownlow nodded to Mr. Grimwig; and again that gentleman
limped away with extraordinary readiness.  But not again did he return
with a stout man and wife; for this time, he led in two palsied women,
who shook and tottered as they walked.

'You shut the door the night old Sally died,' said the foremost one,
raising her shrivelled hand, 'but you couldn't shut out the sound, nor
stop the chinks.'

'No, no,' said the other, looking round her and wagging her toothless
jaws.  'No, no, no.'

'We heard her try to tell you what she'd done, and saw you take a paper
from her hand, and watched you too, next day, to the pawnbroker's
shop,' said the first.

'Yes,' added the second, 'and it was a "locket and gold ring." We found
out that, and saw it given you.  We were by.  Oh! we were by.'

'And we know more than that,' resumed the first, 'for she told us
often, long ago, that the young mother had told her that, feeling she
should never get over it, she was on her way, at the time that she was
taken ill, to die near the grave of the father of the child.'

'Would you like to see the pawnbroker himself?' asked Mr. Grimwig with
a motion towards the door.

'No,' replied the woman; 'if he'--she pointed to Monks--'has been coward
enough to confess, as I see he has, and you have sounded all these hags
till you have found the right ones, I have nothing more to say.  I
_did_ sell them, and they're where you'll never get them.  What then?'

'Nothing,' replied Mr. Brownlow, 'except that it remains for us to take
care that neither of you is employed in a situation of trust again.
You may leave the room.'

'I hope,' said Mr. Bumble, looking about him with great ruefulness, as
Mr. Grimwig disappeared with the two old women: 'I hope that this
unfortunate little circumstance will not deprive me of my porochial
office?'

'Indeed it will,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'You may make up your mind to
that, and think yourself well off besides.'

'It was all Mrs. Bumble.  She _would_ do it,' urged Mr. Bumble; first
looking round to ascertain that his partner had left the room.

'That is no excuse,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'You were present on the
occasion of the destruction of these trinkets, and indeed are the more
guilty of the two, in the eye of the law; for the law supposes that
your wife acts under your direction.'

'If the law supposes that,' said Mr. Bumble, squeezing his hat
emphatically in both hands, 'the law is a ass--a idiot.  If that's the
eye of the law, the law is a bachelor; and the worst I wish the law is,
that his eye may be opened by experience--by experience.'

Laying great stress on the repetition of these two words, Mr. Bumble
fixed his hat on very tight, and putting his hands in his pockets,
followed his helpmate downstairs.

'Young lady,' said Mr. Brownlow, turning to Rose, 'give me your hand.
Do not tremble.  You need not fear to hear the few remaining words we
have to say.'

'If they have--I do not know how they can, but if they have--any
reference to me,' said Rose, 'pray let me hear them at some other time.
I have not strength or spirits now.'

'Nay,' returned the old gentlman, drawing her arm through his; 'you
have more fortitude than this, I am sure.  Do you know this young lady,
sir?'

'Yes,' replied Monks.

'I never saw you before,' said Rose faintly.

'I have seen you often,' returned Monks.

'The father of the unhappy Agnes had _two_ daughters,' said Mr.
Brownlow.  'What was the fate of the other--the child?'

'The child,' replied Monks, 'when her father died in a strange place,
in a strange name, without a letter, book, or scrap of paper that
yielded the faintest clue by which his friends or relatives could be
traced--the child was taken by some wretched cottagers, who reared it
as their own.'

'Go on,' said Mr. Brownlow, signing to Mrs. Maylie to approach. 'Go on!'

'You couldn't find the spot to which these people had repaired,' said
Monks, 'but where friendship fails, hatred will often force a way.  My
mother found it, after a year of cunning search--ay, and found the
child.'

'She took it, did she?'

'No.  The people were poor and began to sicken--at least the man
did--of their fine humanity; so she left it with them, giving them a
small present of money which would not last long, and promised more,
which she never meant to send.  She didn't quite rely, however, on
their discontent and poverty for the child's unhappiness, but told the
history of the sister's shame, with such alterations as suited her;
bade them take good heed of the child, for she came of bad blood; and
told them she was illegitimate, and sure to go wrong at one time or
other.  The circumstances countenanced all this; the people believed
it; and there the child dragged on an existence, miserable enough even
to satisfy us, until a widow lady, residing, then, at Chester, saw the
girl by chance, pitied her, and took her home.  There was some cursed
spell, I think, against us; for in spite of all our efforts she
remained there and was happy.  I lost sight of her, two or three years
ago, and saw her no more until a few months back.'

'Do you see her now?'

'Yes.  Leaning on your arm.'

'But not the less my niece,' cried Mrs. Maylie, folding the fainting
girl in her arms; 'not the less my dearest child.  I would not lose her
now, for all the treasures of the world.  My sweet companion, my own
dear girl!'

'The only friend I ever had,' cried Rose, clinging to her. 'The
kindest, best of friends.  My heart will burst.  I cannot bear all
this.'

'You have borne more, and have been, through all, the best and gentlest
creature that ever shed happiness on every one she knew,' said Mrs.
Maylie, embracing her tenderly. 'Come, come, my love, remember who this
is who waits to clasp you in his arms, poor child!  See here--look,
look, my dear!'

'Not aunt,' cried Oliver, throwing his arms about her neck; 'I'll never
call her aunt--sister, my own dear sister, that something taught my
heart to love so dearly from the first!  Rose, dear, darling Rose!'

Let the tears which fell, and the broken words which were exchanged in
the long close embrace between the orphans, be sacred.  A father,
sister, and mother, were gained, and lost, in that one moment.  Joy and
grief were mingled in the cup; but there were no bitter tears:  for
even grief itself arose so softened, and clothed in such sweet and
tender recollections, that it became a solemn pleasure, and lost all
character of pain.

They were a long, long time alone.  A soft tap at the door, at length
announced that some one was without.  Oliver opened it, glided away,
and gave place to Harry Maylie.

'I know it all,' he said, taking a seat beside the lovely girl. 'Dear
Rose, I know it all.'

'I am not here by accident,' he added after a lengthened silence; 'nor
have I heard all this to-night, for I knew it yesterday--only
yesterday.  Do you guess that I have come to remind you of a promise?'

'Stay,' said Rose.  'You _do_ know all.'

'All.  You gave me leave, at any time within a year, to renew the
subject of our last discourse.'

'I did.'

'Not to press you to alter your determination,' pursued the young man,
'but to hear you repeat it, if you would. I was to lay whatever of
station or fortune I might possess at your feet, and if you still
adhered to your former determination, I pledged myself, by no word or
act, to seek to change it.'

'The same reasons which influenced me then, will influence me now,'
said Rose firmly.  'If I ever owed a strict and rigid duty to her,
whose goodness saved me from a life of indigence and suffering, when
should I ever feel it, as I should to-night?  It is a struggle,' said
Rose, 'but one I am proud to make; it is a pang, but one my heart shall
bear.'

'The disclosure of to-night,'--Harry began.

'The disclosure of to-night,' replied Rose softly, 'leaves me in the
same position, with reference to you, as that in which I stood before.'

'You harden your heart against me, Rose,' urged her lover.

'Oh Harry, Harry,' said the young lady, bursting into tears; 'I wish I
could, and spare myself this pain.'

'Then why inflict it on yourself?' said Harry, taking her hand. 'Think,
dear Rose, think what you have heard to-night.'

'And what have I heard!  What have I heard!' cried Rose. 'That a sense
of his deep disgrace so worked upon my own father that he shunned
all--there, we have said enough, Harry, we have said enough.'

'Not yet, not yet,' said the young man, detaining her as she rose.  'My
hopes, my wishes, prospects, feeling:  every thought in life except my
love for you:  have undergone a change.  I offer you, now, no
distinction among a bustling crowd; no mingling with a world of malice
and detraction, where the blood is called into honest cheeks by aught
but real disgrace and shame; but a home--a heart and home--yes, dearest
Rose, and those, and those alone, are all I have to offer.'

'What do you mean!' she faltered.

'I mean but this--that when I left you last, I left you with a firm
determination to level all fancied barriers between yourself and me;
resolved that if my world could not be yours, I would make yours mine;
that no pride of birth should curl the lip at you, for I would turn
from it.  This I have done.  Those who have shrunk from me because of
this, have shrunk from you, and proved you so far right.  Such power
and patronage:  such relatives of influence and rank:  as smiled upon
me then, look coldly now; but there are smiling fields and waving trees
in England's richest county; and by one village church--mine, Rose, my
own!--there stands a rustic dwelling which you can make me prouder of,
than all the hopes I have renounced, measured a thousandfold.  This is
my rank and station now, and here I lay it down!'

      *      *      *      *      *

'It's a trying thing waiting supper for lovers,' said Mr. Grimwig,
waking up, and pulling his pocket-handkerchief from over his head.

Truth to tell, the supper had been waiting a most unreasonable time.
Neither Mrs. Maylie, nor Harry, nor Rose (who all came in together),
could offer a word in extenuation.

'I had serious thoughts of eating my head to-night,' said Mr. Grimwig,
'for I began to think I should get nothing else.  I'll take the
liberty, if you'll allow me, of saluting the bride that is to be.'

Mr. Grimwig lost no time in carrying this notice into effect upon the
blushing girl; and the example, being contagious, was followed both by
the doctor and Mr. Brownlow:  some people affirm that Harry Maylie had
been observed to set it, originally, in a dark room adjoining; but the
best authorities consider this downright scandal:  he being young and a
clergyman.

'Oliver, my child,' said Mrs. Maylie, 'where have you been, and why do
you look so sad?  There are tears stealing down your face at this
moment.  What is the matter?'

It is a world of disappointment:  often to the hopes we most cherish,
and hopes that do our nature the greatest honour.

Poor Dick was dead!



CHAPTER LII

FAGIN'S LAST NIGHT ALIVE

The court was paved, from floor to roof, with human faces. Inquisitive
and eager eyes peered from every inch of space. From the rail before
the dock, away into the sharpest angle of the smallest corner in the
galleries, all looks were fixed upon one man--Fagin.  Before him and
behind:  above, below, on the right and on the left:  he seemed to
stand surrounded by a firmament, all bright with gleaming eyes.

He stood there, in all this glare of living light, with one hand
resting on the wooden slab before him, the other held to his ear, and
his head thrust forward to enable him to catch with greater
distinctness every word that fell from the presiding judge, who was
delivering his charge to the jury.  At times, he turned his eyes
sharply upon them to observe the effect of the slightest featherweight
in his favour; and when the points against him were stated with
terrible distinctness, looked towards his counsel, in mute appeal that
he would, even then, urge something in his behalf.  Beyond these
manifestations of anxiety, he stirred not hand or foot.  He had
scarcely moved since the trial began; and now that the judge ceased to
speak, he still remained in the same strained attitude of close
attention, with his gaze bent on him, as though he listened still.

A slight bustle in the court, recalled him to himself.  Looking round,
he saw that the juryman had turned together, to consider their verdict.
As his eyes wandered to the gallery, he could see the people rising
above each other to see his face:  some hastily applying their glasses
to their eyes:  and others whispering their neighbours with looks
expressive of abhorrence.  A few there were, who seemed unmindful of
him, and looked only to the jury, in impatient wonder how they could
delay.  But in no one face--not even among the women, of whom there
were many there--could he read the faintest sympathy with himself, or
any feeling but one of all-absorbing interest that he should be
condemned.

As he saw all this in one bewildered glance, the deathlike stillness
came again, and looking back he saw that the jurymen had turned towards
the judge.  Hush!

They only sought permission to retire.

He looked, wistfully, into their faces, one by one when they passed
out, as though to see which way the greater number leant; but that was
fruitless.  The jailer touched him on the shoulder. He followed
mechanically to the end of the dock, and sat down on a chair.  The man
pointed it out, or he would not have seen it.

He looked up into the gallery again.  Some of the people were eating,
and some fanning themselves with handkerchiefs; for the crowded place
was very hot.  There was one young man sketching his face in a little
note-book.  He wondered whether it was like, and looked on when the
artist broke his pencil-point, and made another with his knife, as any
idle spectator might have done.

In the same way, when he turned his eyes towards the judge, his mind
began to busy itself with the fashion of his dress, and what it cost,
and how he put it on.  There was an old fat gentleman on the bench,
too, who had gone out, some half an hour before, and now come back.  He
wondered within himself whether this man had been to get his dinner,
what he had had, and where he had had it; and pursued this train of
careless thought until some new object caught his eye and roused
another.

Not that, all this time, his mind was, for an instant, free from one
oppressive overwhelming sense of the grave that opened at his feet; it
was ever present to him, but in a vague and general way, and he could
not fix his thoughts upon it.  Thus, even while he trembled, and turned
burning hot at the idea of speedy death, he fell to counting the iron
spikes before him, and wondering how the head of one had been broken
off, and whether they would mend it, or leave it as it was.  Then, he
thought of all the horrors of the gallows and the scaffold--and stopped
to watch a man sprinkling the floor to cool it--and then went on to
think again.

At length there was a cry of silence, and a breathless look from all
towards the door.  The jury returned, and passed him close. He could
glean nothing from their faces; they might as well have been of stone.
Perfect stillness ensued--not a rustle--not a breath--Guilty.

The building rang with a tremendous shout, and another, and another,
and then it echoed loud groans, that gathered strength as they swelled
out, like angry thunder.  It was a peal of joy from the populace
outside, greeting the news that he would die on Monday.

The noise subsided, and he was asked if he had anything to say why
sentence of death should not be passed upon him. He had resumed his
listening attitude, and looked intently at his questioner while the
demand was made; but it was twice repeated before he seemed to hear it,
and then he only muttered that he was an old man--an old man--and so,
dropping into a whisper, was silent again.

The judge assumed the black cap, and the prisoner still stood with the
same air and gesture.  A woman in the gallery, uttered some
exclamation, called forth by this dread solemnity; he looked hastily up
as if angry at the interruption, and bent forward yet more attentively.
The address was solemn and impressive; the sentence fearful to hear.
But he stood, like a marble figure, without the motion of a nerve.  His
haggard face was still thrust forward, his under-jaw hanging down, and
his eyes staring out before him, when the jailer put his hand upon his
arm, and beckoned him away.  He gazed stupidly about him for an
instant, and obeyed.

They led him through a paved room under the court, where some prisoners
were waiting till their turns came, and others were talking to their
friends, who crowded round a grate which looked into the open yard.
There was nobody there to speak to _him_; but, as he passed, the
prisoners fell back to render him more visible to the people who were
clinging to the bars:  and they assailed him with opprobrious names,
and screeched and hissed.  He shook his fist, and would have spat upon
them; but his conductors hurried him on, through a gloomy passage
lighted by a few dim lamps, into the interior of the prison.

Here, he was searched, that he might not have about him the means of
anticipating the law; this ceremony performed, they led him to one of
the condemned cells, and left him there--alone.

He sat down on a stone bench opposite the door, which served for seat
and bedstead; and casting his blood-shot eyes upon the ground, tried to
collect his thoughts. After awhile, he began to remember a few
disjointed fragments of what the judge had said: though it had seemed
to him, at the time, that he could not hear a word.  These gradually
fell into their proper places, and by degrees suggested more:  so that
in a little time he had the whole, almost as it was delivered.  To be
hanged by the neck, till he was dead--that was the end.  To be hanged
by the neck till he was dead.

As it came on very dark, he began to think of all the men he had known
who had died upon the scaffold; some of them through his means.  They
rose up, in such quick succession, that he could hardly count them.  He
had seen some of them die,--and had joked too, because they died with
prayers upon their lips.  With what a rattling noise the drop went
down; and how suddenly they changed, from strong and vigorous men to
dangling heaps of clothes!

Some of them might have inhabited that very cell--sat upon that very
spot.  It was very dark; why didn't they bring a light?  The cell had
been built for many years.  Scores of men must have passed their last
hours there.  It was like sitting in a vault strewn with dead
bodies--the cap, the noose, the pinioned arms, the faces that he knew,
even beneath that hideous veil.--Light, light!

At length, when his hands were raw with beating against the heavy door
and walls, two men appeared:  one bearing a candle, which he thrust
into an iron candlestick fixed against the wall:  the other dragging in
a mattress on which to pass the night; for the prisoner was to be left
alone no more.

Then came the night--dark, dismal, silent night.  Other watchers are
glad to hear this church-clock strike, for they tell of life and coming
day.  To him they brought despair.  The boom of every iron bell came
laden with the one, deep, hollow sound--Death. What availed the noise
and bustle of cheerful morning, which penetrated even there, to him?
It was another form of knell, with mockery added to the warning.

The day passed off.  Day?  There was no day; it was gone as soon as
come--and night came on again; night so long, and yet so short; long in
its dreadful silence, and short in its fleeting hours.  At one time he
raved and blasphemed; and at another howled and tore his hair.
Venerable men of his own persuasion had come to pray beside him, but he
had driven them away with curses.  They renewed their charitable
efforts, and he beat them off.

Saturday night.  He had only one night more to live.  And as he thought
of this, the day broke--Sunday.

It was not until the night of this last awful day, that a withering
sense of his helpless, desperate state came in its full intensity upon
his blighted soul; not that he had ever held any defined or positive
hope of mercy, but that he had never been able to consider more than
the dim probability of dying so soon. He had spoken little to either of
the two men, who relieved each other in their attendance upon him; and
they, for their parts, made no effort to rouse his attention.  He had
sat there, awake, but dreaming.  Now, he started up, every minute, and
with gasping mouth and burning skin, hurried to and fro, in such a
paroxysm of fear and wrath that even they--used to such
sights--recoiled from him with horror.  He grew so terrible, at last,
in all the tortures of his evil conscience, that one man could not bear
to sit there, eyeing him alone; and so the two kept watch together.

He cowered down upon his stone bed, and thought of the past. He had
been wounded with some missiles from the crowd on the day of his
capture, and his head was bandaged with a linen cloth.  His red hair
hung down upon his bloodless face; his beard was torn, and twisted into
knots; his eyes shone with a terrible light; his unwashed flesh
crackled with the fever that burnt him up. Eight--nine--then.  If it
was not a trick to frighten him, and those were the real hours treading
on each other's heels, where would he be, when they came round again!
Eleven!  Another struck, before the voice of the previous hour had
ceased to vibrate.  At eight, he would be the only mourner in his own
funeral train; at eleven--

Those dreadful walls of Newgate, which have hidden so much misery and
such unspeakable anguish, not only from the eyes, but, too often, and
too long, from the thoughts, of men, never held so dread a spectacle as
that.  The few who lingered as they passed, and wondered what the man
was doing who was to be hanged to-morrow, would have slept but ill that
night, if they could have seen him.

From early in the evening until nearly midnight, little groups of two
and three presented themselves at the lodge-gate, and inquired, with
anxious faces, whether any reprieve had been received.  These being
answered in the negative, communicated the welcome intelligence to
clusters in the street, who pointed out to one another the door from
which he must come out, and showed where the scaffold would be built,
and, walking with unwilling steps away, turned back to conjure up the
scene.  By degrees they fell off, one by one; and, for an hour, in the
dead of night, the street was left to solitude and darkness.

The space before the prison was cleared, and a few strong barriers,
painted black, had been already thrown across the road to break the
pressure of the expected crowd, when Mr. Brownlow and Oliver appeared
at the wicket, and presented an order of admission to the prisoner,
signed by one of the sheriffs.  They were immediately admitted into the
lodge.

'Is the young gentleman to come too, sir?' said the man whose duty it
was to conduct them.  'It's not a sight for children, sir.'

'It is not indeed, my friend,' rejoined Mr. Brownlow; 'but my business
with this man is intimately connected with him; and as this child has
seen him in the full career of his success and villainy, I think it as
well--even at the cost of some pain and fear--that he should see him
now.'

These few words had been said apart, so as to be inaudible to Oliver.
The man touched his hat; and glancing at Oliver with some curiousity,
opened another gate, opposite to that by which they had entered, and
led them on, through dark and winding ways, towards the cells.

'This,' said the man, stopping in a gloomy passage where a couple of
workmen were making some preparations in profound silence--'this is the
place he passes through.  If you step this way, you can see the door he
goes out at.'

He led them into a stone kitchen, fitted with coppers for dressing the
prison food, and pointed to a door.  There was an open grating above
it, through which came the sound of men's voices, mingled with the
noise of hammering, and the throwing down of boards.  They were
putting up the scaffold.

From this place, they passed through several strong gates, opened by
other turnkeys from the inner side; and, having entered an open yard,
ascended a flight of narrow steps, and came into a passage with a row
of strong doors on the left hand.  Motioning them to remain where they
were, the turnkey knocked at one of these with his bunch of keys. The
two attendants, after a little whispering, came out into the passage,
stretching themselves as if glad of the temporary relief, and motioned
the visitors to follow the jailer into the cell.  They did so.

The condemned criminal was seated on his bed, rocking himself from side
to side, with a countenance more like that of a snared beast than the
face of a man.  His mind was evidently wandering to his old life, for
he continued to mutter, without appearing conscious of their presence
otherwise than as a part of his vision.

'Good boy, Charley--well done--' he mumbled.  'Oliver, too, ha! ha! ha!
Oliver too--quite the gentleman now--quite the--take that boy away to
bed!'

The jailer took the disengaged hand of Oliver; and, whispering him not
to be alarmed, looked on without speaking.

'Take him away to bed!' cried Fagin.  'Do you hear me, some of you?  He
has been the--the--somehow the cause of all this.  It's worth the money
to bring him up to it--Bolter's throat, Bill; never mind the
girl--Bolter's throat as deep as you can cut.  Saw his head off!'

'Fagin,' said the jailer.

'That's me!' cried the Jew, falling instantly, into the attitude of
listening he had assumed upon his trial.  'An old man, my Lord; a very
old, old man!'

'Here,' said the turnkey, laying his hand upon his breast to keep him
down.  'Here's somebody wants to see you, to ask you some questions, I
suppose.  Fagin, Fagin!  Are you a man?'

'I shan't be one long,' he replied, looking up with a face retaining no
human expression but rage and terror.  'Strike them all dead!  What
right have they to butcher me?'

As he spoke he caught sight of Oliver and Mr. Brownlow. Shrinking to
the furthest corner of the seat, he demanded to know what they wanted
there.

'Steady,' said the turnkey, still holding him down.  'Now, sir, tell
him what you want.  Quick, if you please, for he grows worse as the
time gets on.'

'You have some papers,' said Mr. Brownlow advancing, 'which were placed
in your hands, for better security, by a man called Monks.'

'It's all a lie together,' replied Fagin.  'I haven't one--not one.'

'For the love of God,' said Mr. Brownlow solemnly, 'do not say that
now, upon the very verge of death; but tell me where they are.  You
know that Sikes is dead; that Monks has confessed; that there is no
hope of any further gain.  Where are those papers?'

'Oliver,' cried Fagin, beckoning to him.  'Here, here! Let me whisper
to you.'

'I am not afraid,' said Oliver in a low voice, as he relinquished Mr.
Brownlow's hand.

'The papers,' said Fagin, drawing Oliver towards him, 'are in a canvas
bag, in a hole a little way up the chimney in the top front-room.  I
want to talk to you, my dear.  I want to talk to you.'

'Yes, yes,' returned Oliver.  'Let me say a prayer.  Do!  Let me say
one prayer.  Say only one, upon your knees, with me, and we will talk
till morning.'

'Outside, outside,' replied Fagin, pushing the boy before him towards
the door, and looking vacantly over his head. 'Say I've gone to
sleep--they'll believe you.  You can get me out, if you take me so.
Now then, now then!'

'Oh!  God forgive this wretched man!' cried the boy with a burst of
tears.

'That's right, that's right,' said Fagin.  'That'll help us on. This
door first.  If I shake and tremble, as we pass the gallows, don't you
mind, but hurry on.  Now, now, now!'

'Have you nothing else to ask him, sir?' inquired the turnkey.

'No other question,' replied Mr. Brownlow.  'If I hoped we could recall
him to a sense of his position--'

'Nothing will do that, sir,' replied the man, shaking his head. 'You
had better leave him.'

The door of the cell opened, and the attendants returned.

'Press on, press on,' cried Fagin.  'Softly, but not so slow. Faster,
faster!'

The men laid hands upon him, and disengaging Oliver from his grasp,
held him back.  He struggled with the power of desperation, for an
instant; and then sent up cry upon cry that penetrated even those
massive walls, and rang in their ears until they reached the open yard.

It was some time before they left the prison.  Oliver nearly swooned
after this frightful scene, and was so weak that for an hour or more,
he had not the strength to walk.

Day was dawning when they again emerged.  A great multitude had already
assembled; the windows were filled with people, smoking and playing
cards to beguile the time; the crowd were pushing, quarrelling, joking.
Everything told of life and animation, but one dark cluster of objects
in the centre of all--the black stage, the cross-beam, the rope, and
all the hideous apparatus of death.



CHAPTER LIII

AND LAST

The fortunes of those who have figured in this tale are nearly closed.
The little that remains to their historian to relate, is told in few
and simple words.

Before three months had passed, Rose Fleming and Harry Maylie were
married in the village church which was henceforth to be the scene of
the young clergyman's labours; on the same day they entered into
possession of their new and happy home.

Mrs. Maylie took up her abode with her son and daughter-in-law, to
enjoy, during the tranquil remainder of her days, the greatest felicity
that age and worth can know--the contemplation of the happiness of
those on whom the warmest affections and tenderest cares of a
well-spent life, have been unceasingly bestowed.

It appeared, on full and careful investigation, that if the wreck of
property remaining in the custody of Monks (which had never prospered
either in his hands or in those of his mother) were equally divided
between himself and Oliver, it would yield, to each, little more than
three thousand pounds.  By the provisions of his father's will, Oliver
would have been entitled to the whole; but Mr. Brownlow, unwilling to
deprive the elder son of the opportunity of retrieving his former vices
and pursuing an honest career, proposed this mode of distribution, to
which his young charge joyfully acceded.

Monks, still bearing that assumed name, retired with his portion to a
distant part of the New World; where, having quickly squandered it, he
once more fell into his old courses, and, after undergoing a long
confinement for some fresh act of fraud and knavery, at length sunk
under an attack of his old disorder, and died in prison.  As far from
home, died the chief remaining members of his friend Fagin's gang.

Mr. Brownlow adopted Oliver as his son.  Removing with him and the old
housekeeper to within a mile of the parsonage-house, where his dear
friends resided, he gratified the only remaining wish of Oliver's warm
and earnest heart, and thus linked together a little society, whose
condition approached as nearly to one of perfect happiness as can ever
be known in this changing world.

Soon after the marriage of the young people, the worthy doctor returned
to Chertsey, where, bereft of the presence of his old friends, he would
have been discontented if his temperament had admitted of such a
feeling; and would have turned quite peevish if he had known how.  For
two or three months, he contented himself with hinting that he feared
the air began to disagree with him; then, finding that the place really
no longer was, to him, what it had been, he settled his business on his
assistant, took a bachelor's cottage outside the village of which his
young friend was pastor, and instantaneously recovered.  Here he took
to gardening, planting, fishing, carpentering, and various other
pursuits of a similar kind:  all undertaken with his characteristic
impetuosity.  In each and all he has since become famous throughout the
neighborhood, as a most profound authority.

Before his removal, he had managed to contract a strong friendship for
Mr. Grimwig, which that eccentric gentleman cordially reciprocated.  He
is accordingly visited by Mr. Grimwig a great many times in the course
of the year.  On all such occasions, Mr. Grimwig plants, fishes, and
carpenters, with great ardour; doing everything in a very singular and
unprecedented manner, but always maintaining with his favourite
asseveration, that his mode is the right one.  On Sundays, he never
fails to criticise the sermon to the young clergyman's face:  always
informing Mr. Losberne, in strict confidence afterwards, that he
considers it an excellent performance, but deems it as well not to say
so.  It is a standing and very favourite joke, for Mr. Brownlow to
rally him on his old prophecy concerning Oliver, and to remind him of
the night on which they sat with the watch between them, waiting his
return; but Mr. Grimwig contends that he was right in the main, and, in
proof thereof, remarks that Oliver did not come back after all; which
always calls forth a laugh on his side, and increases his good humour.

Mr. Noah Claypole:  receiving a free pardon from the Crown in
consequence of being admitted approver against Fagin:  and considering
his profession not altogether as safe a one as he could wish:  was, for
some little time, at a loss for the means of a livelihood, not burdened
with too much work.  After some consideration, he went into business as
an informer, in which calling he realises a genteel subsistence.  His
plan is, to walk out once a week during church time attended by
Charlotte in respectable attire.  The lady faints away at the doors of
charitable publicans, and the gentleman being accommodated with
three-penny worth of brandy to restore her, lays an information next
day, and pockets half the penalty.  Sometimes Mr. Claypole faints
himself, but the result is the same.

Mr. and Mrs. Bumble, deprived of their situations, were gradually
reduced to great indigence and misery, and finally became paupers in
that very same workhouse in which they had once lorded it over others.
Mr. Bumble has been heard to say, that in this reverse and degradation,
he has not even spirits to be thankful for being separated from his
wife.

As to Mr. Giles and Brittles, they still remain in their old posts,
although the former is bald, and the last-named boy quite grey.  They
sleep at the parsonage, but divide their attentions so equally among
its inmates, and Oliver and Mr. Brownlow, and Mr. Losberne, that to
this day the villagers have never been able to discover to which
establishment they properly belong.

Master Charles Bates, appalled by Sikes's crime, fell into a train of
reflection whether an honest life was not, after all, the best.
Arriving at the conclusion that it certainly was, he turned his back
upon the scenes of the past, resolved to amend it in some new sphere of
action.  He struggled hard, and suffered much, for some time; but,
having a contented disposition, and a good purpose, succeeded in the
end; and, from being a farmer's drudge, and a carrier's lad, he is now
the merriest young grazier in all Northamptonshire.

And now, the hand that traces these words, falters, as it approaches
the conclusion of its task; and would weave, for a little longer space,
the thread of these adventures.

I would fain linger yet with a few of those among whom I have so long
moved, and share their happiness by endeavouring to depict it.  I would
show Rose Maylie in all the bloom and grace of early womanhood,
shedding on her secluded path in life soft and gentle light, that fell
on all who trod it with her, and shone into their hearts.  I would
paint her the life and joy of the fire-side circle and the lively
summer group; I would follow her through the sultry fields at noon, and
hear the low tones of her sweet voice in the moonlit evening walk; I
would watch her in all her goodness and charity abroad, and the smiling
untiring discharge of domestic duties at home; I would paint her and
her dead sister's child happy in their love for one another, and
passing whole hours together in picturing the friends whom they had so
sadly lost; I would summon before me, once again, those joyous little
faces that clustered round her knee, and listen to their merry prattle;
I would recall the tones of that clear laugh, and conjure up the
sympathising tear that glistened in the soft blue eye.  These, and a
thousand looks and smiles, and turns of thought and speech--I would
fain recall them every one.

How Mr. Brownlow went on, from day to day, filling the mind of his
adopted child with stores of knowledge, and becoming attached to him,
more and more, as his nature developed itself, and showed the thriving
seeds of all he wished him to become--how he traced in him new traits
of his early friend, that awakened in his own bosom old remembrances,
melancholy and yet sweet and soothing--how the two orphans, tried by
adversity, remembered its lessons in mercy to others, and mutual love,
and fervent thanks to Him who had protected and preserved them--these
are all matters which need not to be told.  I have said that they were
truly happy; and without strong affection and humanity of heart, and
gratitude to that Being whose code is Mercy, and whose great attribute
is Benevolence to all things that breathe, happiness can never be
attained.

Within the altar of the old village church there stands a white marble
tablet, which bears as yet but one word:  'AGNES.'  There is no coffin
in that tomb; and may it be many, many years, before another name is
placed above it!  But, if the spirits of the Dead ever come back to
earth, to visit spots hallowed by the love--the love beyond the
grave--of those whom they knew in life, I believe that the shade of
Agnes sometimes hovers round that solemn nook. I believe it none the
less because that nook is in a Church, and she was weak and erring.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Oliver Twist, by Charles Dickens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLIVER TWIST ***

***** This file should be named 730.txt or 730.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/3/730/

Produced by Peggy Gaugy and Leigh Little.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Project Gutenbergs The Complete Works of William Shakespeare, by William
Shakespeare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, youll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.


Title: The Complete Works of William Shakespeare

Author: William Shakespeare

Release Date: January 1994 [EBook #100]
Last Updated: September 7, 2019

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE ***




The Complete Works of William Shakespeare



by William Shakespeare




      Contents



               THE SONNETS

               ALLS WELL THAT ENDS WELL

               THE TRAGEDY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA

               AS YOU LIKE IT

               THE COMEDY OF ERRORS

               THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS

               CYMBELINE

               THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK

               THE FIRST PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH

               THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE FOURTH

               THE LIFE OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH

               THE FIRST PART OF HENRY THE SIXTH

               THE SECOND PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

               THE THIRD PART OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH

               KING HENRY THE EIGHTH

               KING JOHN

               THE TRAGEDY OF JULIUS CAESAR

               THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR

               LOVES LABOURS LOST

               THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH

               MEASURE FOR MEASURE

               THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

               THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

               A MIDSUMMER NIGHTS DREAM

               MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING

               THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, MOOR OF VENICE

               PERICLES, PRINCE OF TYRE

               KING RICHARD THE SECOND

               KING RICHARD THE THIRD

               THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET

               THE TAMING OF THE SHREW

               THE TEMPEST

               THE LIFE OF TIMON OF ATHENS

               THE TRAGEDY OF TITUS ANDRONICUS

               THE HISTORY OF TROILUS AND CRESSIDA

               TWELFTH NIGHT; OR, WHAT YOU WILL

               THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA

               THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN

               THE WINTERS TALE

               A LOVERS COMPLAINT

               THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM

               THE PHOENIX AND THE TURTLE

               THE RAPE OF LUCRECE

               VENUS AND ADONIS






THE SONNETS

                    1

From fairest creatures we desire increase,
That thereby beautys rose might never die,
But as the riper should by time decease,
His tender heir might bear his memory:
But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,
Feedst thy lights flame with self-substantial fuel,
Making a famine where abundance lies,
Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
Thou that art now the worlds fresh ornament,
And only herald to the gaudy spring,
Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
And, tender churl, makst waste in niggarding:
  Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
  To eat the worlds due, by the grave and thee.


                    2

When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
And dig deep trenches in thy beautys field,
Thy youths proud livery so gazed on now,
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held:
Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
How much more praise deservd thy beautys use,
If thou couldst answer This fair child of mine
Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
  This were to be new made when thou art old,
  And see thy blood warm when thou feelst it cold.


                    3

Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
For where is she so fair whose uneared womb
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
Or who is he so fond will be the tomb
Of his self-love to stop posterity?
Thou art thy mothers glass and she in thee
Calls back the lovely April of her prime,
So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
  But if thou live remembered not to be,
  Die single and thine image dies with thee.


                    4

Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend,
Upon thy self thy beautys legacy?
Natures bequest gives nothing but doth lend,
And being frank she lends to those are free:
Then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse,
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
Profitless usurer why dost thou use
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
For having traffic with thy self alone,
Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive,
Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
  Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
  Which used lives th executor to be.


                    5

Those hours that with gentle work did frame
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
Will play the tyrants to the very same,
And that unfair which fairly doth excel:
For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty oer-snowed and bareness every where:
Then were not summers distillation left
A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
Beautys effect with beauty were bereft,
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
  But flowers distilled though they with winter meet,
  Leese but their show, their substance still lives sweet.


                    6

Then let not winters ragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place,
With beautys treasure ere it be self-killed:
That use is not forbidden usury,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
Thats for thy self to breed another thee,
Or ten times happier be it ten for one,
Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
Leaving thee living in posterity?
  Be not self-willed for thou art much too fair,
  To be deaths conquest and make worms thine heir.


                    7

Lo in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
Serving with looks his sacred majesty,
And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
But when from highmost pitch with weary car,
Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
The eyes (fore duteous) now converted are
From his low tract and look another way:
  So thou, thy self out-going in thy noon:
  Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.


                    8

Music to hear, why hearst thou music sadly?
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
Why lovst thou that which thou receivst not gladly,
Or else receivst with pleasure thine annoy?
If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
By unions married do offend thine ear,
They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear:
Mark how one string sweet husband to another,
Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
  Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
  Sings this to thee, Thou single wilt prove none.


                    9

Is it for fear to wet a widows eye,
That thou consumst thy self in single life?
Ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife,
The world will be thy widow and still weep,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
When every private widow well may keep,
By childrens eyes, her husbands shape in mind:
Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
But beautys waste hath in the world an end,
And kept unused the user so destroys it:
  No love toward others in that bosom sits
  That on himself such murdrous shame commits.


                    10

For shame deny that thou bearst love to any
Who for thy self art so unprovident.
Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
But that thou none lovst is most evident:
For thou art so possessed with murdrous hate,
That gainst thy self thou stickst not to conspire,
Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
O change thy thought, that I may change my mind,
Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
Be as thy presence is gracious and kind,
Or to thy self at least kind-hearted prove,
  Make thee another self for love of me,
  That beauty still may live in thine or thee.


                    11

As fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou growst,
In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestowst,
Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest,
Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
Without this folly, age, and cold decay,
If all were minded so, the times should cease,
And threescore year would make the world away:
Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
Look whom she best endowed, she gave thee more;
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
  She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
  Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.


                    12

When I do count the clock that tells the time,
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
When I behold the violet past prime,
And sable curls all silvered oer with white:
When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd
And summers green all girded up in sheaves
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
Then of thy beauty do I question make
That thou among the wastes of time must go,
Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
And die as fast as they see others grow,
  And nothing gainst Times scythe can make defence
  Save breed to brave him, when he takes thee hence.


                    13

O that you were your self, but love you are
No longer yours, than you your self here live,
Against this coming end you should prepare,
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
So should that beauty which you hold in lease
Find no determination, then you were
Your self again after your selfs decease,
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
Against the stormy gusts of winters day
And barren rage of deaths eternal cold?
  O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,
  You had a father, let your son say so.


                    14

Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck,
And yet methinks I have astronomy,
But not to tell of good, or evil luck,
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons quality,
Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell;
Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
Or say with princes if it shall go well
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
And constant stars in them I read such art
As truth and beauty shall together thrive
If from thy self, to store thou wouldst convert:
  Or else of thee this I prognosticate,
  Thy end is truths and beautys doom and date.


                    15

When I consider every thing that grows
Holds in perfection but a little moment.
That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment.
When I perceive that men as plants increase,
Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky:
Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
And wear their brave state out of memory.
Then the conceit of this inconstant stay,
Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
Where wasteful time debateth with decay
To change your day of youth to sullied night,
  And all in war with Time for love of you,
  As he takes from you, I engraft you new.


                    16

But wherefore do not you a mightier way
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time?
And fortify your self in your decay
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
And many maiden gardens yet unset,
With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
So should the lines of life that life repair
Which this (Times pencil) or my pupil pen
Neither in inward worth nor outward fair
Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
  To give away your self, keeps your self still,
  And you must live drawn by your own sweet skill.


                    17

Who will believe my verse in time to come
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts:
If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
The age to come would say this poet lies,
Such heavenly touches neer touched earthly faces.
So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
Be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue,
And your true rights be termed a poets rage,
And stretched metre of an antique song.
  But were some child of yours alive that time,
  You should live twice in it, and in my rhyme.


                    18

Shall I compare thee to a summers day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summers lease hath all too short a date:
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed,
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance, or natures changing course untrimmed:
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owst,
Nor shall death brag thou wandrest in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou growst,
  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.


                    19

Devouring Time blunt thou the lions paws,
And make the earth devour her own sweet brood,
Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tigers jaws,
And burn the long-lived phoenix, in her blood,
Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleetst,
And do whateer thou wilt swift-footed Time
To the wide world and all her fading sweets:
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime,
O carve not with thy hours my loves fair brow,
Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen,
Him in thy course untainted do allow,
For beautys pattern to succeeding men.
  Yet do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
  My love shall in my verse ever live young.


                    20

A womans face with natures own hand painted,
Hast thou the master mistress of my passion,
A womans gentle heart but not acquainted
With shifting change as is false womens fashion,
An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling:
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth,
A man in hue all hues in his controlling,
Which steals mens eyes and womens souls amazeth.
And for a woman wert thou first created,
Till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting,
And by addition me of thee defeated,
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
  But since she pricked thee out for womens pleasure,
  Mine be thy love and thy loves use their treasure.


                    21

So is it not with me as with that muse,
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
Who heaven it self for ornament doth use,
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Making a couplement of proud compare
With sun and moon, with earth and seas rich gems:
With Aprils first-born flowers and all things rare,
That heavens air in this huge rondure hems.
O let me true in love but truly write,
And then believe me, my love is as fair,
As any mothers child, though not so bright
As those gold candles fixed in heavens air:
  Let them say more that like of hearsay well,
  I will not praise that purpose not to sell.


                    22

My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
But when in thee times furrows I behold,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me,
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O therefore love be of thyself so wary,
As I not for my self, but for thee will,
Bearing thy heart which I will keep so chary
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
  Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
  Thou gavst me thine not to give back again.


                    23

As an unperfect actor on the stage,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
Whose strengths abundance weakens his own heart;
So I for fear of trust, forget to say,
The perfect ceremony of loves rite,
And in mine own loves strength seem to decay,
Oercharged with burthen of mine own loves might:
O let my looks be then the eloquence,
And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
  O learn to read what silent love hath writ,
  To hear with eyes belongs to loves fine wit.


                    24

Mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled,
Thy beautys form in table of my heart,
My body is the frame wherein tis held,
And perspective it is best painters art.
For through the painter must you see his skill,
To find where your true image pictured lies,
Which in my bosoms shop is hanging still,
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes:
Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done,
Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
  Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
  They draw but what they see, know not the heart.


                    25

Let those who are in favour with their stars,
Of public honour and proud titles boast,
Whilst I whom fortune of such triumph bars
Unlooked for joy in that I honour most;
Great princes favourites their fair leaves spread,
But as the marigold at the suns eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
The painful warrior famoused for fight,
After a thousand victories once foiled,
Is from the book of honour razed quite,
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled:
  Then happy I that love and am beloved
  Where I may not remove nor be removed.


                    26

Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit;
To thee I send this written embassage
To witness duty, not to show my wit.
Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
But that I hope some good conceit of thine
In thy souls thought (all naked) will bestow it:
Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
  Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
  Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.


                    27

Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
But then begins a journey in my head
To work my mind, when bodys works expired.
For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
Save that my souls imaginary sight
Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
Which like a jewel (hung in ghastly night)
Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
  Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind,
  For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.


                    28

How can I then return in happy plight
That am debarred the benefit of rest?
When days oppression is not eased by night,
But day by night and night by day oppressed.
And each (though enemies to eithers reign)
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
The one by toil, the other to complain
How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
When sparkling stars twire not thou gildst the even.
  But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
  And night doth nightly make griefs length seem stronger


                    29

When in disgrace with Fortune and mens eyes,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
And look upon my self and curse my fate,
Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
Desiring this mans art, and that mans scope,
With what I most enjoy contented least,
Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
(Like to the lark at break of day arising
From sullen earth) sings hymns at heavens gate,
  For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
  That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


                    30

When to the sessions of sweet silent thought,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear times waste:
Then can I drown an eye (unused to flow)
For precious friends hid in deaths dateless night,
And weep afresh loves long since cancelled woe,
And moan th expense of many a vanished sight.
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell oer
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
  But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
  All losses are restored, and sorrows end.


                    31

Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all loves loving parts,
And all those friends which I thought buried.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stoln from mine eye,
As interest of the dead, which now appear,
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
That due of many, now is thine alone.
  Their images I loved, I view in thee,
  And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.


                    32

If thou survive my well-contented day,
When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:
Compare them with the bettring of the time,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
Had my friends Muse grown with this growing age,
A dearer birth than this his love had brought
To march in ranks of better equipage:
  But since he died and poets better prove,
  Theirs for their style Ill read, his for his love.


                    33

Full many a glorious morning have I seen,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy:
Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
And from the forlorn world his visage hide
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
With all triumphant splendour on my brow,
But out alack, he was but one hour mine,
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
  Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
  Suns of the world may stain, when heavens sun staineth.


                    34

Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
To let base clouds oertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravry in their rotten smoke?
Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
For no man well of such a salve can speak,
That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
Th offenders sorrow lends but weak relief
To him that bears the strong offences cross.
  Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
  And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.


                    35

No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
All men make faults, and even I in this,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,
Thy adverse party is thy advocate,
And gainst my self a lawful plea commence:
Such civil war is in my love and hate,
  That I an accessary needs must be,
  To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.


                    36

Let me confess that we two must be twain,
Although our undivided loves are one:
So shall those blots that do with me remain,
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
In our two loves there is but one respect,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Which though it alter not loves sole effect,
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from loves delight.
I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                    37

As a decrepit father takes delight,
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
So I, made lame by Fortunes dearest spite
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
Or any of these all, or all, or more
Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
I make my love engrafted to this store:
So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give,
That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
And by a part of all thy glory live:
  Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
  This wish I have, then ten times happy me.


                    38

How can my muse want subject to invent
While thou dost breathe that pourst into my verse,
Thine own sweet argument, too excellent,
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
O give thy self the thanks if aught in me,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
For whos so dumb that cannot write to thee,
When thou thy self dost give invention light?
Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
Than those old nine which rhymers invocate,
And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
  If my slight muse do please these curious days,
  The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


                    39

O how thy worth with manners may I sing,
When thou art all the better part of me?
What can mine own praise to mine own self bring:
And what ist but mine own when I praise thee?
Even for this, let us divided live,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
That by this separation I may give:
That due to thee which thou deservst alone:
O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove,
Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.
  And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
  By praising him here who doth hence remain.


                    40

Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,
All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest
By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief
Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear greater wrong, than hates known injury.
  Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
  Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.


                    41

Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
For still temptation follows where thou art.
Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
And when a woman woos, what womans son,
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
Who lead thee in their riot even there
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
  Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
  Thine by thy beauty being false to me.


                    42

That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
Thou dost love her, because thou knowst I love her,
And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
Suffring my friend for my sake to approve her.
If I lose thee, my loss is my loves gain,
And losing her, my friend hath found that loss,
Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
And both for my sake lay on me this cross,
  But heres the joy, my friend and I are one,
  Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.


                    43

When most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
For all the day they view things unrespected,
But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright
How would thy shadows form, form happy show,
To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
By looking on thee in the living day,
When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
  All days are nights to see till I see thee,
  And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.


                    44

If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
For then despite of space I would be brought,
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay,
No matter then although my foot did stand
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
As soon as think the place where he would be.
But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
But that so much of earth and water wrought,
I must attend, times leisure with my moan.
  Receiving nought by elements so slow,
  But heavy tears, badges of eithers woe.


                    45

The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
The first my thought, the other my desire,
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
For when these quicker elements are gone
In tender embassy of love to thee,
My life being made of four, with two alone,
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
Until lifes composition be recured,
By those swift messengers returned from thee,
Who even but now come back again assured,
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
  This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
  I send them back again and straight grow sad.


                    46

Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
Mine eye, my heart thy pictures sight would bar,
My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
(A closet never pierced with crystal eyes)
But the defendant doth that plea deny,
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
To side this title is impanelled
A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
And by their verdict is determined
The clear eyes moiety, and the dear hearts part.
  As thus, mine eyes due is thy outward part,
  And my hearts right, thy inward love of heart.


                    47

Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
And each doth good turns now unto the other,
When that mine eye is famished for a look,
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
With my loves picture then my eye doth feast,
And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
Another time mine eye is my hearts guest,
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
So either by thy picture or my love,
Thy self away, art present still with me,
For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
And I am still with them, and they with thee.
  Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
  Awakes my heart, to hearts and eyes delight.


                    48

How careful was I when I took my way,
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
That to my use it might unused stay
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
Within the gentle closure of my breast,
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part,
  And even thence thou wilt be stoln I fear,
  For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.


                    49

Against that time (if ever that time come)
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
Called to that audit by advised respects,
Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
When love converted from the thing it was
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
Against that time do I ensconce me here
Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
And this my hand, against my self uprear,
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
  To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
  Since why to love, I can allege no cause.


                    50

How heavy do I journey on the way,
When what I seek (my weary travels end)
Doth teach that case and that repose to say
Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.
The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
As if by some instinct the wretch did know
His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
Which heavily he answers with a groan,
More sharp to me than spurring to his side,
  For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
  My grief lies onward and my joy behind.


                    51

Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,
Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
Till I return of posting is no need.
O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
In winged speed no motion shall I know,
Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
Therefore desire (of perfectst love being made)
Shall neigh (no dull flesh) in his fiery race,
But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
  Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
  Towards thee Ill run, and give him leave to go.


                    52

So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
The which he will not every hour survey,
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
Since seldom coming in that long year set,
Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
So is the time that keeps you as my chest
Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
To make some special instant special-blest,
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
  Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
  Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.


                    53

What is your substance, whereof are you made,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
And you but one, can every shadow lend:
Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
Is poorly imitated after you,
On Helens cheek all art of beauty set,
And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
The other as your bounty doth appear,
And you in every blessed shape we know.
  In all external grace you have some part,
  But you like none, none you for constant heart.


                    54

O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour, which doth in it live:
The canker blooms have full as deep a dye,
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly,
When summers breath their masked buds discloses:
But for their virtue only is their show,
They live unwooed, and unrespected fade,
Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so,
Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
  And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
  When that shall fade, my verse distills your truth.


                    55

Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
But you shall shine more bright in these contents
Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Nor Mars his sword, nor wars quick fire shall burn:
The living record of your memory.
Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
Even in the eyes of all posterity
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
  So till the judgment that your self arise,
  You live in this, and dwell in lovers eyes.


                    56

Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Which but to-day by feeding is allayed,
To-morrow sharpened in his former might.
So love be thou, although to-day thou fill
Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
To-morrow see again, and do not kill
The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
Let this sad interim like the ocean be
Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
Return of love, more blest may be the view.
  Or call it winter, which being full of care,
  Makes summers welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.


                    57

Being your slave what should I do but tend,
Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
I have no precious time at all to spend;
Nor services to do till you require.
Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
But like a sad slave stay and think of nought
Save where you are, how happy you make those.
  So true a fool is love, that in your will,
  (Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.


                    58

That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Or at your hand th account of hours to crave,
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
O let me suffer (being at your beck)
Th imprisoned absence of your liberty,
And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
Without accusing you of injury.
Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
That you your self may privilage your time
To what you will, to you it doth belong,
Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.
  I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
  Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.


                    59

If there be nothing new, but that which is,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
Which labouring for invention bear amis
The second burthen of a former child!
O that record could with a backward look,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Show me your image in some antique book,
Since mind at first in character was done.
That I might see what the old world could say,
To this composed wonder of your frame,
Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
Or whether revolution be the same.
  O sure I am the wits of former days,
  To subjects worse have given admiring praise.


                    60

Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
Each changing place with that which goes before,
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
Nativity once in the main of light,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
Crooked eclipses gainst his glory fight,
And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.
Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
And delves the parallels in beautys brow,
Feeds on the rarities of natures truth,
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
  And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
  Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.


                    61

Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
Is it thy spirit that thou sendst from thee
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
To find out shames and idle hours in me,
The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
O no, thy love though much, is not so great,
It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
  For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
  From me far off, with others all too near.


                    62

Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
And all my soul, and all my every part;
And for this sin there is no remedy,
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And for my self mine own worth do define,
As I all other in all worths surmount.
But when my glass shows me my self indeed
beated and chopt with tanned antiquity,
Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:
Self, so self-loving were iniquity.
  Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy days.


                    63

Against my love shall be as I am now
With Times injurious hand crushed and oerworn,
When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
Hath travelled on to ages steepy night,
And all those beauties whereof now hes king
Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
For such a time do I now fortify
Against confounding ages cruel knife,
That he shall never cut from memory
My sweet loves beauty, though my lovers life.
  His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
  And they shall live, and he in them still green.


                    64

When I have seen by Times fell hand defaced
The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
And the firm soil win of the watery main,
Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
When I have seen such interchange of State,
Or state it self confounded, to decay,
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate
That Time will come and take my love away.
  This thought is as a death which cannot choose
  But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.


                    65

Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
But sad mortality oersways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O how shall summers honey breath hold out,
Against the wrackful siege of battring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
O fearful meditation, where alack,
Shall Times best jewel from Times chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
  O none, unless this miracle have might,
  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


                    66

Tired with all these for restful death I cry,
As to behold desert a beggar born,
And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
And strength by limping sway disabled
And art made tongue-tied by authority,
And folly (doctor-like) controlling skill,
And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
And captive good attending captain ill.
  Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
  Save that to die, I leave my love alone.


                    67

Ah wherefore with infection should he live,
And with his presence grace impiety,
That sin by him advantage should achieve,
And lace it self with his society?
Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is,
Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins,
For she hath no exchequer now but his,
And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
  O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
  In days long since, before these last so bad.


                    68

Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
Before the golden tresses of the dead,
The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
To live a second life on second head,
Ere beautys dead fleece made another gay:
In him those holy antique hours are seen,
Without all ornament, it self and true,
Making no summer of anothers green,
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
  And him as for a map doth Nature store,
  To show false Art what beauty was of yore.


                    69

Those parts of thee that the worlds eye doth view,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
All tongues (the voice of souls) give thee that due,
Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
In other accents do this praise confound
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
They look into the beauty of thy mind,
And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
  But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
  The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.


                    70

That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
For slanders mark was ever yet the fair,
The ornament of beauty is suspect,
A crow that flies in heavens sweetest air.
So thou be good, slander doth but approve,
Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
And thou presentst a pure unstained prime.
Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
  If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
  Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.


                    71

No longer mourn for me when I am dead,
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
Give warning to the world that I am fled
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
Nay if you read this line, remember not,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
O if (I say) you look upon this verse,
When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
But let your love even with my life decay.
  Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
  And mock you with me after I am gone.


                    72

O lest the world should task you to recite,
What merit lived in me that you should love
After my death (dear love) forget me quite,
For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
To do more for me than mine own desert,
And hang more praise upon deceased I,
Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
O lest your true love may seem false in this,
That you for love speak well of me untrue,
My name be buried where my body is,
And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.
  For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
  And so should you, to love things nothing worth.


                    73

That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Deaths second self that seals up all in rest.
In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
  This thou perceivst, which makes thy love more strong,
  To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.


                    74

But be contented when that fell arrest,
Without all bail shall carry me away,
My life hath in this line some interest,
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
When thou reviewest this, thou dost review,
The very part was consecrate to thee,
The earth can have but earth, which is his due,
My spirit is thine the better part of me,
So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
The prey of worms, my body being dead,
The coward conquest of a wretchs knife,
Too base of thee to be remembered,
  The worth of that, is that which it contains,
  And that is this, and this with thee remains.


                    75

So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
And for the peace of you I hold such strife
As twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
Now counting best to be with you alone,
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
And by and by clean starved for a look,
Possessing or pursuing no delight
Save what is had, or must from you be took.
  Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
  Or gluttoning on all, or all away.


                    76

Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
So far from variation or quick change?
Why with the time do I not glance aside
To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
Why write I still all one, ever the same,
And keep invention in a noted weed,
That every word doth almost tell my name,
Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
O know sweet love I always write of you,
And you and love are still my argument:
So all my best is dressing old words new,
Spending again what is already spent:
  For as the sun is daily new and old,
  So is my love still telling what is told.


                    77

Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
These vacant leaves thy minds imprint will bear,
And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
Thou by thy dials shady stealth mayst know,
Times thievish progress to eternity.
Look what thy memory cannot contain,
Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
  These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
  Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.


                    78

So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
And found such fair assistance in my verse,
As every alien pen hath got my use,
And under thee their poesy disperse.
Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Have added feathers to the learneds wing,
And given grace a double majesty.
Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
In others works thou dost but mend the style,
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
  But thou art all my art, and dost advance
  As high as learning, my rude ignorance.


                    79

Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
And my sick muse doth give an other place.
I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give
And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
  Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
  Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.


                    80

O how I faint when I of you do write,
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
But since your worth (wide as the ocean is)
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
My saucy bark (inferior far to his)
On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
Or (being wrecked) I am a worthless boat,
He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
  Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
  The worst was this, my love was my decay.


                    81

Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
From hence your memory death cannot take,
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
The earth can yield me but a common grave,
When you entombed in mens eyes shall lie,
Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
Which eyes not yet created shall oer-read,
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
When all the breathers of this world are dead,
  You still shall live (such virtue hath my pen)
  Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.


                    82

I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
And therefore mayst without attaint oerlook
The dedicated words which writers use
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
And do so love, yet when they have devised,
What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathized,
In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend.
  And their gross painting might be better used,
  Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.


                    83

I never saw that you did painting need,
And therefore to your fair no painting set,
I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
That barren tender of a poets debt:
And therefore have I slept in your report,
That you your self being extant well might show,
How far a modern quill doth come too short,
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
This silence for my sin you did impute,
Which shall be most my glory being dumb,
For I impair not beauty being mute,
When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
  There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
  Than both your poets can in praise devise.


                    84

Who is it that says most, which can say more,
Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you?
In whose confine immured is the store,
Which should example where your equal grew.
Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
Let him but copy what in you is writ,
Not making worse what nature made so clear,
And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
Making his style admired every where.
  You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
  Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.


                    85

My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still,
While comments of your praise richly compiled,
Reserve their character with golden quill,
And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
To every hymn that able spirit affords,
In polished form of well refined pen.
Hearing you praised, I say tis so, tis true,
And to the most of praise add something more,
But that is in my thought, whose love to you
(Though words come hindmost) holds his rank before,
  Then others, for the breath of words respect,
  Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.


                    86

Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
He nor that affable familiar ghost
Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
As victors of my silence cannot boast,
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
  But when your countenance filled up his line,
  Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.


                    87

Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou knowst thy estimate,
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thy self thou gavst, thy own worth then not knowing,
Or me to whom thou gavst it, else mistaking,
So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgement making.
  Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
  In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.


                    88

When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
Upon thy side, against my self Ill fight,
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
Upon thy part I can set down a story
Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted:
That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory:
And I by this will be a gainer too,
For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
The injuries that to my self I do,
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
  Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
  That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.


                    89

Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
And I will comment upon that offence,
Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt:
Against thy reasons making no defence.
Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
To set a form upon desired change,
As Ill my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
Lest I (too much profane) should do it wronk:
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
  For thee, against my self Ill vow debate,
  For I must neer love him whom thou dost hate.


                    90

Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
And do not drop in for an after-loss:
Ah do not, when my heart hath scaped this sorrow,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
When other petty griefs have done their spite,
But in the onset come, so shall I taste
At first the very worst of fortunes might.
  And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
  Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.


                    91

Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
Some in their wealth, some in their bodys force,
Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
But these particulars are not my measure,
All these I better in one general best.
Thy love is better than high birth to me,
Richer than wealth, prouder than garments costs,
Of more delight than hawks and horses be:
And having thee, of all mens pride I boast.
  Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
  All this away, and me most wretchcd make.


                    92

But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
And life no longer than thy love will stay,
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
When in the least of them my life hath end,
I see, a better state to me belongs
Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.
Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie,
O what a happy title do I find,
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
  But whats so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
  Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.


                    93

So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
Like a deceived husband, so loves face,
May still seem love to me, though altered new:
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
In manys looks, the false hearts history
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
But heaven in thy creation did decree,
That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
Whateer thy thoughts, or thy hearts workings be,
Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
  How like Eves apple doth thy beauty grow,
  If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.


                    94

They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
That do not do the thing, they most do show,
Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
They rightly do inherit heavens graces,
And husband natures riches from expense,
Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
Others, but stewards of their excellence:
The summers flower is to the summer sweet,
Though to it self, it only live and die,
But if that flower with base infection meet,
The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
  For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
  Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.


                    95

How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
(Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
O what a mansion have those vices got,
Which for their habitation chose out thee,
Where beautys veil doth cover every blot,
And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see!
  Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
  The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.


                    96

Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:
Thou makst faults graces, that to thee resort:
As on the finger of a throned queen,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed:
So are those errors that in thee are seen,
To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
  But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
  As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


                    97

How like a winter hath my absence been
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
What old Decembers bareness everywhere!
And yet this time removed was summers time,
The teeming autumn big with rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombs after their lords decease:
Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit,
For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
And thou away, the very birds are mute.
  Or if they sing, tis with so dull a cheer,
  That leaves look pale, dreading the winters near.


                    98

From you have I been absent in the spring,
When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing:
That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
Could make me any summers story tell:
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
Nor did I wonder at the lilys white,
Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
They were but sweet, but figures of delight:
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
  Yet seemed it winter still, and you away,
  As with your shadow I with these did play.


                    99

The forward violet thus did I chide,
Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
If not from my loves breath? The purple pride
Which on thy soft check for complexion dwells,
In my loves veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
And buds of marjoram had stoln thy hair,
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
One blushing shame, another white despair:
A third nor red, nor white, had stoln of both,
And to his robbery had annexed thy breath,
But for his theft in pride of all his growth
A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
  More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
  But sweet, or colour it had stoln from thee.


                    100

Where art thou Muse that thou forgetst so long,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
Spendst thou thy fury on some worthless song,
Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
Rise resty Muse, my loves sweet face survey,
If time have any wrinkle graven there,
If any, be a satire to decay,
And make times spoils despised everywhere.
  Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
  So thou preventst his scythe, and crooked knife.


                    101

O truant Muse what shall be thy amends,
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
Both truth and beauty on my love depends:
So dost thou too, and therein dignified:
Make answer Muse, wilt thou not haply say,
Truth needs no colour with his colour fixed,
Beauty no pencil, beautys truth to lay:
But best is best, if never intermixed?
Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
Excuse not silence so, fort lies in thee,
To make him much outlive a gilded tomb:
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
  Then do thy office Muse, I teach thee how,
  To make him seem long hence, as he shows now.


                    102

My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming,
I love not less, though less the show appear,
That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming,
The owners tongue doth publish every where.
Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
As Philomel in summers front doth sing,
And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
Not that the summer is less pleasant now
Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
But that wild music burthens every bough,
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
  Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
  Because I would not dull you with my song.


                    103

Alack what poverty my muse brings forth,
That having such a scope to show her pride,
The argument all bare is of more worth
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
O blame me not if I no more can write!
Look in your glass and there appears a face,
That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
Were it not sinful then striving to mend,
To mar the subject that before was well?
For to no other pass my verses tend,
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
  And more, much more than in my verse can sit,
  Your own glass shows you, when you look in it.


                    104

To me fair friend you never can be old,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Such seems your beauty still: three winters cold,
Have from the forests shook three summers pride,
Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned,
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned,
Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.
Ah yet doth beauty like a dial hand,
Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived,
So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
  For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred,
  Ere you were born was beautys summer dead.


                    105

Let not my love be called idolatry,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
Since all alike my songs and praises be
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence,
Therefore my verse to constancy confined,
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Fair, kind, and true, is all my argument,
Fair, kind, and true, varying to other words,
And in this change is my invention spent,
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
  Fair, kind, and true, have often lived alone.
  Which three till now, never kept seat in one.


                    106

When in the chronicle of wasted time,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
And beauty making beautiful old rhyme,
In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,
Then in the blazon of sweet beautys best,
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
I see their antique pen would have expressed,
Even such a beauty as you master now.
So all their praises are but prophecies
Of this our time, all you prefiguring,
And for they looked but with divining eyes,
They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
  For we which now behold these present days,
  Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.


                    107

Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul,
Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come,
Can yet the lease of my true love control,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage,
Incertainties now crown themselves assured,
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,
Since spite of him Ill live in this poor rhyme,
While he insults oer dull and speechless tribes.
  And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
  When tyrants crests and tombs of brass are spent.


                    108

Whats in the brain that ink may character,
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit,
Whats new to speak, what now to register,
That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
Nothing sweet boy, but yet like prayers divine,
I must each day say oer the very same,
Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that eternal love in loves fresh case,
Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
  Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
  Where time and outward form would show it dead.


                    109

O never say that I was false of heart,
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify,
As easy might I from my self depart,
As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
Like him that travels I return again,
Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
So that my self bring water for my stain,
Never believe though in my nature reigned,
All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
That it could so preposterously be stained,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:
  For nothing this wide universe I call,
  Save thou my rose, in it thou art my all.


                    110

Alas tis true, I have gone here and there,
And made my self a motley to the view,
Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
Made old offences of affections new.
Most true it is, that I have looked on truth
Askance and strangely: but by all above,
These blenches gave my heart another youth,
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Now all is done, have what shall have no end,
Mine appetite I never more will grind
On newer proof, to try an older friend,
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
  Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
  Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.


                    111

O for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
That did not better for my life provide,
Than public means which public manners breeds.
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyers hand:
Pity me then, and wish I were renewed,
Whilst like a willing patient I will drink,
Potions of eisel gainst my strong infection,
No bitterness that I will bitter think,
Nor double penance to correct correction.
  Pity me then dear friend, and I assure ye,
  Even that your pity is enough to cure me.


                    112

Your love and pity doth th impression fill,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow,
For what care I who calls me well or ill,
So you oer-green my bad, my good allow?
You are my all the world, and I must strive,
To know my shames and praises from your tongue,
None else to me, nor I to none alive,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
In so profound abysm I throw all care
Of others voices, that my adders sense,
To critic and to flatterer stopped are:
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense.
  You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
  That all the world besides methinks are dead.


                    113

Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
And that which governs me to go about,
Doth part his function, and is partly blind,
Seems seeing, but effectually is out:
For it no form delivers to the heart
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch,
Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch:
For if it see the rudst or gentlest sight,
The most sweet favour or deformedst creature,
The mountain, or the sea, the day, or night:
The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
  Incapable of more, replete with you,
  My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.


                    114

Or whether doth my mind being crowned with you
Drink up the monarchs plague this flattery?
Or whether shall I say mine eye saith true,
And that your love taught it this alchemy?
To make of monsters, and things indigest,
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creating every bad a perfect best
As fast as objects to his beams assemble:
O tis the first, tis flattery in my seeing,
And my great mind most kingly drinks it up,
Mine eye well knows what with his gust is greeing,
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
  If it be poisoned, tis the lesser sin,
  That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.


                    115

Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
Even those that said I could not love you dearer,
Yet then my judgment knew no reason why,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer,
But reckoning time, whose millioned accidents
Creep in twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharpst intents,
Divert strong minds to the course of altring things:
Alas why fearing of times tyranny,
Might I not then say Now I love you best,
When I was certain oer incertainty,
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
  Love is a babe, then might I not say so
  To give full growth to that which still doth grow.


                    116

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments, love is not love
Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.
O no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
It is the star to every wandring bark,
Whose worths unknown, although his height be taken.
Loves not Times fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickles compass come,
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom:
  If this be error and upon me proved,
  I never writ, nor no man ever loved.


                    117

Accuse me thus, that I have scanted all,
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day,
That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
And given to time your own dear-purchased right,
That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
And on just proof surmise, accumulate,
Bring me within the level of your frown,
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate:
  Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
  The constancy and virtue of your love.


                    118

Like as to make our appetite more keen
With eager compounds we our palate urge,
As to prevent our maladies unseen,
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge.
Even so being full of your neer-cloying sweetness,
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
And sick of welfare found a kind of meetness,
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
Thus policy in love t anticipate
The ills that were not, grew to faults assured,
And brought to medicine a healthful state
Which rank of goodness would by ill be cured.
  But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
  Drugs poison him that so feil sick of you.


                    119

What potions have I drunk of Siren tears
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
Still losing when I saw my self to win!
What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
Whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never!
How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted
In the distraction of this madding fever!
O benefit of ill, now I find true
That better is, by evil still made better.
And ruined love when it is built anew
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
  So I return rebuked to my content,
  And gain by ills thrice more than I have spent.


                    120

That you were once unkind befriends me now,
And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
Needs must I under my transgression bow,
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
For if you were by my unkindness shaken
As I by yours, yhave passed a hell of time,
And I a tyrant have no leisure taken
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
O that our night of woe might have remembered
My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
And soon to you, as you to me then tendered
The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
  But that your trespass now becomes a fee,
  Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.


                    121

Tis better to be vile than vile esteemed,
When not to be, receives reproach of being,
And the just pleasure lost, which is so deemed,
Not by our feeling, but by others seeing.
For why should others false adulterate eyes
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
No, I am that I am, and they that level
At my abuses, reckon up their own,
I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown
  Unless this general evil they maintain,
  All men are bad and in their badness reign.


                    122

Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Which shall above that idle rank remain
Beyond all date even to eternity.
Or at the least, so long as brain and heart
Have faculty by nature to subsist,
Till each to razed oblivion yield his part
Of thee, thy record never can be missed:
That poor retention could not so much hold,
Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score,
Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
To trust those tables that receive thee more:
  To keep an adjunct to remember thee
  Were to import forgetfulness in me.


                    123

No! Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
To me are nothing novel, nothing strange,
They are but dressings Of a former sight:
Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire,
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
And rather make them born to our desire,
Than think that we before have heard them told:
Thy registers and thee I both defy,
Not wondring at the present, nor the past,
For thy records, and what we see doth lie,
Made more or less by thy continual haste:
  This I do vow and this shall ever be,
  I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.


                    124

If my dear love were but the child of state,
It might for Fortunes bastard be unfathered,
As subject to times love or to times hate,
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
No it was builded far from accident,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Under the blow of thralled discontent,
Whereto th inviting time our fashion calls:
It fears not policy that heretic,
Which works on leases of short-numbered hours,
But all alone stands hugely politic,
That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
  To this I witness call the fools of time,
  Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.


                    125

Weret aught to me I bore the canopy,
With my extern the outward honouring,
Or laid great bases for eternity,
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
Lose all, and more by paying too much rent
For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
Pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent?
No, let me be obsequious in thy heart,
And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
Which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art,
But mutual render, only me for thee.
  Hence, thou suborned informer, a true soul
  When most impeached, stands least in thy control.


                    126

O thou my lovely boy who in thy power,
Dost hold Times fickle glass his fickle hour:
Who hast by waning grown, and therein showst,
Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self growst.
If Nature (sovereign mistress over wrack)
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
May time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
Yet fear her O thou minion of her pleasure,
She may detain, but not still keep her treasure!
  Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
  And her quietus is to render thee.


                    127

In the old age black was not counted fair,
Or if it were it bore not beautys name:
But now is black beautys successive heir,
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame,
For since each hand hath put on natures power,
Fairing the foul with arts false borrowed face,
Sweet beauty hath no name no holy bower,
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
Therefore my mistress eyes are raven black,
Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem,
At such who not born fair no beauty lack,
Slandering creation with a false esteem,
  Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
  That every tongue says beauty should look so.


                    128

How oft when thou, my music, music playst,
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
With thy sweet fingers when thou gently swayst
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
At the woods boldness by thee blushing stand.
To be so tickled they would change their state
And situation with those dancing chips,
Oer whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
Making dead wood more blest than living lips,
  Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
  Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.


                    129

Th expense of spirit in a waste of shame
Is lust in action, and till action, lust
Is perjured, murdrous, bloody full of blame,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust,
Enjoyed no sooner but despised straight,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had
Past reason hated as a swallowed bait,
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Mad in pursuit and in possession so,
Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme,
A bliss in proof and proved, a very woe,
Before a joy proposed behind a dream.
  All this the world well knows yet none knows well,
  To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.


                    130

My mistress eyes are nothing like the sun,
Coral is far more red, than her lips red,
If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun:
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head:
I have seen roses damasked, red and white,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks,
And in some perfumes is there more delight,
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,
That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
I grant I never saw a goddess go,
My mistress when she walks treads on the ground.
  And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,
  As any she belied with false compare.


                    131

Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
For well thou knowst to my dear doting heart
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Yet in good faith some say that thee behold,
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
To say they err, I dare not be so bold,
Although I swear it to my self alone.
And to be sure that is not false I swear,
A thousand groans but thinking on thy face,
One on anothers neck do witness bear
Thy black is fairest in my judgments place.
  In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
  And thence this slander as I think proceeds.


                    132

Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
Have put on black, and loving mourners be,
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
And truly not the morning sun of heaven
Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
Nor that full star that ushers in the even
Doth half that glory to the sober west
As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
O let it then as well beseem thy heart
To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
And suit thy pity like in every part.
  Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
  And all they foul that thy complexion lack.


                    133

Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me;
Ist not enough to torture me alone,
But slave to slavery my sweetst friend must be?
Me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed,
Of him, my self, and thee I am forsaken,
A torment thrice three-fold thus to be crossed:
Prison my heart in thy steel bosoms ward,
But then my friends heart let my poor heart bail,
Whoeer keeps me, let my heart be his guard,
Thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol.
  And yet thou wilt, for I being pent in thee,
  Perforce am thine and all that is in me.


                    134

So now I have confessed that he is thine,
And I my self am mortgaged to thy will,
My self Ill forfeit, so that other mine,
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
For thou art covetous, and he is kind,
He learned but surety-like to write for me,
Under that bond that him as fist doth bind.
The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
Thou usurer that putst forth all to use,
And sue a friend, came debtor for my sake,
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
  Him have I lost, thou hast both him and me,
  He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.


                    135

Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will,
And Will to boot, and Will in overplus,
More than enough am I that vex thee still,
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Wilt thou whose will is large and spacious,
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Shall will in others seem right gracious,
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
The sea all water, yet receives rain still,
And in abundance addeth to his store,
So thou being rich in will add to thy will
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
  Let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill,
  Think all but one, and me in that one Will.


                    136

If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will,
And will thy soul knows is admitted there,
Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.
Will will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one,
In things of great receipt with case we prove,
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Then in the number let me pass untold,
Though in thy stores account I one must be,
For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold,
That nothing me, a something sweet to thee.
  Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
  And then thou lovst me for my name is Will.


                    137

Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
That they behold and see not what they see?
They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
Yet what the best is, take the worst to be.
If eyes corrupt by over-partial looks,
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Why of eyes falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
Why should my heart think that a several plot,
Which my heart knows the wide worlds common place?
Or mine eyes seeing this, say this is not
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
  In things right true my heart and eyes have erred,
  And to this false plague are they now transferred.


                    138

When my love swears that she is made of truth,
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That she might think me some untutored youth,
Unlearned in the worlds false subtleties.
Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue,
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
And wherefore say not I that I am old?
O loves best habit is in seeming trust,
And age in love, loves not to have years told.
  Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
  And in our faults by lies we flattered be.


                    139

O call not me to justify the wrong,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart,
Wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue,
Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
Tell me thou lovst elsewhere; but in my sight,
Dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside,
What needst thou wound with cunning when thy might
Is more than my oerpressed defence can bide?
Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,
Her pretty looks have been mine enemies,
And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
  Yet do not so, but since I am near slain,
  Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.


                    140

Be wise as thou art cruel, do not press
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain:
Lest sorrow lend me words and words express,
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
If I might teach thee wit better it were,
Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,
As testy sick men when their deaths be near,
No news but health from their physicians know.
For if I should despair I should grow mad,
And in my madness might speak ill of thee,
Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
  That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
  Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.


                    141

In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
For they in thee a thousand errors note,
But tis my heart that loves what they despise,
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
Nor are mine cars with thy tongues tune delighted,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
To any sensual feast with thee alone:
But my five wits, nor my five senses can
Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
Who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man,
Thy proud hearts slave and vassal wretch to be:
  Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
  That she that makes me sin, awards me pain.


                    142

Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving,
O but with mine, compare thou thine own state,
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving,
Or if it do, not from those lips of thine,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments,
And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,
Robbed others beds revenues of their rents.
Be it lawful I love thee as thou lovst those,
Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee,
Root pity in thy heart that when it grows,
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
  If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
  By self-example mayst thou be denied.


                    143

Lo as a careful huswife runs to catch,
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay:
Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent,
To follow that which flies before her face:
Not prizing her poor infants discontent;
So runst thou after that which flies from thee,
Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind,
But if thou catch thy hope turn back to me:
And play the mothers part, kiss me, be kind.
  So will I pray that thou mayst have thy Will,
  If thou turn back and my loud crying still.


                    144

Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still,
The better angel is a man right fair:
The worser spirit a woman coloured ill.
To win me soon to hell my female evil,
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
And would corrupt my saint to be a devil:
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And whether that my angel be turned fiend,
Suspect I may, yet not directly tell,
But being both from me both to each friend,
I guess one angel in anothers hell.
  Yet this shall I neer know but live in doubt,
  Till my bad angel fire my good one out.


                    145

Those lips that Loves own hand did make,
Breathed forth the sound that said I hate,
To me that languished for her sake:
But when she saw my woeful state,
Straight in her heart did mercy come,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet,
Was used in giving gentle doom:
And taught it thus anew to greet:
I hate she altered with an end,
That followed it as gentle day,
Doth follow night who like a fiend
From heaven to hell is flown away.
  I hate, from hate away she threw,
  And saved my life saying not you.


                    146

Poor soul the centre of my sinful earth,
My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms inheritors of this excess
Eat up thy charge? is this thy bodys end?
Then soul live thou upon thy servants loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more,
  So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
  And death once dead, theres no more dying then.


                    147

My love is as a fever longing still,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
Th uncertain sickly appetite to please:
My reason the physician to my love,
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept
Hath left me, and I desperate now approve,
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Past cure I am, now reason is past care,
And frantic-mad with evermore unrest,
My thoughts and my discourse as mad mens are,
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
  For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
  Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.


                    148

O me! what eyes hath love put in my head,
Which have no correspondence with true sight,
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled,
That censures falsely what they see aright?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote,
Loves eye is not so true as all mens: no,
How can it? O how can loves eye be true,
That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view,
The sun it self sees not, till heaven clears.
  O cunning love, with tears thou keepst me blind,
  Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.


                    149

Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,
When I against my self with thee partake?
Do I not think on thee when I forgot
Am of my self, all-tyrant, for thy sake?
Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
On whom frownst thou that I do fawn upon,
Nay if thou lourst on me do I not spend
Revenge upon my self with present moan?
What merit do I in my self respect,
That is so proud thy service to despise,
When all my best doth worship thy defect,
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
  But love hate on for now I know thy mind,
  Those that can see thou lovst, and I am blind.


                    150

O from what power hast thou this powerful might,
With insufficiency my heart to sway,
To make me give the lie to my true sight,
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
That in the very refuse of thy deeds,
There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
O though I love what others do abhor,
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
  If thy unworthiness raised love in me,
  More worthy I to be beloved of thee.


                    151

Love is too young to know what conscience is,
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
Then gentle cheater urge not my amiss,
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
For thou betraying me, I do betray
My nobler part to my gross bodys treason,
My soul doth tell my body that he may,
Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,
But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
As his triumphant prize, proud of this pride,
He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
  No want of conscience hold it that I call,
  Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.


                    152

In loving thee thou knowst I am forsworn,
But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,
In act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn,
In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
But why of two oaths breach do I accuse thee,
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee:
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness:
Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,
And to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness,
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
  For I have sworn thee fair: more perjured I,
  To swear against the truth so foul a be.


                    153

Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep,
A maid of Dians this advantage found,
And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground:
Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love,
A dateless lively heat still to endure,
And grew a seeting bath which yet men prove,
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure:
But at my mistress eye Loves brand new-fired,
The boy for trial needs would touch my breast,
I sick withal the help of bath desired,
And thither hied a sad distempered guest.
  But found no cure, the bath for my help lies,
  Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress eyes.


                    154

The little Love-god lying once asleep,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
Whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep,
Came tripping by, but in her maiden hand,
The fairest votary took up that fire,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed,
And so the general of hot desire,
Was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed.
This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
Which from Loves fire took heat perpetual,
Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
For men discased, but I my mistress thrall,
  Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
  Loves fire heats water, water cools not love.


THE END



ALLS WELL THAT ENDS WELL



Contents

ACT I
Scene I. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.
Scene II. Paris. A room in the Kings palace.
Scene III. Rossillon. A Room in the Palace.


ACT II
Scene I. Paris. A room in the Kings palace.
Scene II. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.
Scene III. Paris. The Kings palace.
Scene IV. Paris. The Kings palace.
Scene V. Another room in the same.


ACT III
Scene I. Florence. A room in the Dukes palace.
Scene II. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.
Scene III. Florence. Before the Dukes palace.
Scene IV. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.
Scene V. Without the walls of Florence.
Scene VI. Camp before Florence.
Scene VII. Florence. A room in the Widows house.


ACT IV
Scene I. Without the Florentine camp.
Scene II. Florence. A room in the Widows house.
Scene III. The Florentine camp.
Scene IV. Florence. A room in the Widows house.
Scene V. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.


ACT V
Scene I. Marseilles. A street.
Scene II. Rossillon. The inner court of the Countesss palace.
Scene III. The same. A room in the Countesss palace.


 Dramatis Person

KING OF FRANCE.
THE DUKE OF FLORENCE.
BERTRAM, Count of Rossillon.
LAFEW, an old Lord.
PAROLLES, a follower of Bertram.
Several young French Lords, that serve with Bertram in the Florentine
War.
RYNALDO, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
Clown, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
A Page, servant to the Countess of Rossillon.
COUNTESS OF ROSSILLON, mother to Bertram.
HELENA, a Gentlewoman protected by the Countess.
An old WIDOW of Florence.
DIANA, daughter to the Widow.
VIOLENTA, neighbour and friend to the Widow.
MARIANA, neighbour and friend to the Widow.

Lords attending on the KING; Officers; Soldiers, &c., French and
Florentine.

SCENE: Partly in France, and partly in Tuscany.


ACT I

SCENE I. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Enter Bertram, the Countess of Rossillon, Helena, and Lafew, all in
 black.

COUNTESS.
In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.

BERTRAM.
And I in going, madam, weep oer my fathers death anew; but I must
attend his majestys command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore in
subjection.

LAFEW.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you, sir, a father. He
that so generally is at all times good, must of necessity hold his
virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted,
rather than lack it where there is such abundance.

COUNTESS.
What hope is there of his majestys amendment?

LAFEW.
He hath abandond his physicians, madam; under whose practices he hath
persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process
but only the losing of hope by time.

COUNTESS.
This young gentlewoman had a fatherO that had!, how sad a passage
tis!whose skill was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretchd
so far, would have made nature immortal, and death should have play for
lack of work. Would for the kings sake he were living! I think it
would be the death of the kings disease.

LAFEW.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?

COUNTESS.
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his great right to be
so: Gerard de Narbon.

LAFEW.
He was excellent indeed, madam; the king very lately spoke of him
admiringly, and mourningly; he was skilful enough to have livd still,
if knowledge could be set up against mortality.

BERTRAM.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?

LAFEW.
A fistula, my lord.

BERTRAM.
I heard not of it before.

LAFEW.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman the daughter of
Gerard de Narbon?

COUNTESS.
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my overlooking. I have those
hopes of her good that her education promises her dispositions she
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an unclean mind
carries virtuous qualities, there commendations go with pity, they are
virtues and traitors too. In her they are the better for their
simpleness; she derives her honesty, and achieves her goodness.

LAFEW.
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.

COUNTESS.
Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in. The remembrance
of her father never approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows
takes all livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena; go to, no
more, lest it be rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have.

HELENA.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.

LAFEW.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead; excessive grief the
enemy to the living.

COUNTESS.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it soon mortal.

BERTRAM.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.

LAFEW.
How understand we that?

COUNTESS.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape! Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use; and keep thy friend
Under thy own lifes key. Be checkd for silence,
But never taxd for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell. My lord,
Tis an unseasond courtier; good my lord,
Advise him.

LAFEW.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.

COUNTESS.
Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.

 [_Exit Countess._]

BERTRAM.
The best wishes that can be forgd in your thoughts be servants to you!
[_To Helena._] Be comfortable to my mother, your mistress, and make
much of her.

LAFEW.
Farewell, pretty lady, you must hold the credit of your father.

 [_Exeunt Bertram and Lafew._]

HELENA.
O, were that all! I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him; my imagination
Carries no favour int but Bertrams.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star,
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Thambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour; to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our hearts table,heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour.
But now hes gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?

 Enter Parolles.

One that goes with him: I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
Yet these fixd evils sit so fit in him
That they take place when virtues steely bones
Looks bleak i th cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.

PAROLLES.
Save you, fair queen!

HELENA.
And you, monarch!

PAROLLES.
No.

HELENA.
And no.

PAROLLES.
Are you meditating on virginity?

HELENA.
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you; let me ask you a question.
Man is enemy to virginity; how may we barricado it against him?

PAROLLES.
Keep him out.

HELENA.
But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant, in the defence, yet
is weak. Unfold to us some warlike resistance.

PAROLLES.
There is none. Man setting down before you will undermine you and blow
you up.

HELENA.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and blowers-up! Is there no
military policy how virgins might blow up men?

PAROLLES.
Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be blown up; marry, in
blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves made, you lose your
city. It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve
virginity. Loss of virginity is rational increase, and there was never
virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
metal to make virgins. Virginity, by being once lost, may be ten times
found; by being ever kept, it is ever lost. Tis too cold a companion.
Away with it!

HELENA.
I will stand fort a little, though therefore I die a virgin.

PAROLLES.
Theres little can be said int; tis against the rule of nature. To
speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your mothers; which is most
infallible disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin: virginity
murders itself, and should be buried in highways out of all sanctified
limit, as a desperate offendress against nature. Virginity breeds
mites, much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so
dies with feeding his own stomach. Besides, virginity is peevish,
proud, idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose byt. Out witht! Within
the year it will make itself two, which is a goodly increase, and the
principal itself not much the worse. Away with it!

HELENA.
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?

PAROLLES.
Let me see. Marry, ill, to like him that neer it likes. Tis a
commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept, the less
worth. Off witht while tis vendible; answer the time of request.
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of fashion, richly
suited, but unsuitable, just like the brooch and the toothpick, which
wear not now. Your date is better in your pie and your porridge than in
your cheek. And your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our
French witherd pears; it looks ill, it eats drily; marry, tis a
witherd pear; it was formerly better; marry, yet tis a witherd pear.
Will you anything with it?

HELENA.
Not my virginity yet.
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear:
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The courts a learning-place; and he is one.

PAROLLES.
What one, i faith?

HELENA.
That I wish well. Tis pity

PAROLLES.
Whats pity?

HELENA.
That wishing well had not a body int
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.

 Enter a Page.

PAGE.
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.

 [_Exit Page._]

PAROLLES.
Little Helen, farewell. If I can remember thee, I will think of thee at
court.

HELENA.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.

PAROLLES.
Under Mars, I.

HELENA.
I especially think, under Mars.

PAROLLES.
Why under Mars?

HELENA.
The wars hath so kept you under, that you must needs be born under
Mars.

PAROLLES.
When he was predominant.

HELENA.
When he was retrograde, I think rather.

PAROLLES.
Why think you so?

HELENA.
You go so much backward when you fight.

PAROLLES.
Thats for advantage.

HELENA.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety: but the composition
that your valour and fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, and
I like the wear well.

PAROLLES.
I am so full of business I cannot answer thee acutely. I will return
perfect courtier; in the which my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtiers counsel, and understand
what advice shall thrust upon thee; else thou diest in thine
unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes thee away. Farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast none, remember thy
friends. Get thee a good husband, and use him as he uses thee. So,
farewell.

 [_Exit._]

HELENA.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope; only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes, and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love?
The kings disease,my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixd, and will not leave me.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. Paris. A room in the Kings palace.

 Flourish of cornets. Enter the King of France, with letters; Lords and
 others attending.

KING.
The Florentines and Senoys are by th ears;
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war.

FIRST LORD.
So tis reported, sir.

KING.
Nay, tis most credible, we here receive it,
A certainty, vouchd from our cousin Austria,
With caution, that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business, and would seem
To have us make denial.

FIRST LORD.
His love and wisdom,
Approvd so to your majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.

KING.
He hath armd our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.

SECOND LORD.
It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.

KING.
Whats he comes here?

 Enter Bertram, Lafew and Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
It is the Count Rossillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.

KING.
Youth, thou bearst thy fathers face;
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composd thee. Thy fathers moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.

BERTRAM.
My thanks and duty are your majestys.

KING.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership. He did look far
Into the service of the time, and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on,
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father; in his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
Today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awakd them, and his honour,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyd his hand. Who were below him
He usd as creatures of another place,
And bowd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.

BERTRAM.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.

KING.
Would I were with him! He would always say,
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scatterd not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear,Let me not live,
This his good melancholy oft began
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out,Let me not live quoth he,
After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
Expire before their fashions. This he wishd.
I, after him, do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive
To give some labourers room.

SECOND LORD.
Youre lovd, sir;
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

KING.
I fill a place, I knowt. How long ist, Count,
Since the physician at your fathers died?
He was much famd.

BERTRAM.
Some six months since, my lord.

KING.
If he were living, I would try him yet;
Lend me an arm;the rest have worn me out
With several applications; nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, Count;
My sons no dearer.

BERTRAM.
Thank your majesty.

 [_Exeunt. Flourish._]

SCENE III. Rossillon. A Room in the Palace.

 Enter Countess, Steward and Clown.

COUNTESS.
I will now hear. What say you of this gentlewoman?

STEWARD.
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I wish might be found
in the calendar of my past endeavours; for then we wound our modesty,
and make foul the clearness of our deservings, when of ourselves we
publish them.

COUNTESS.
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah. The complaints I have
heard of you I do not all believe; tis my slowness that I do not; for
I know you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability enough to
make such knaveries yours.

CLOWN.
Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.

COUNTESS.
Well, sir.

CLOWN.
No, madam, tis not so well that I am poor, though many of the rich are
damned; but if I may have your ladyships good will to go to the world,
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.

COUNTESS.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

CLOWN.
I do beg your good will in this case.

COUNTESS.
In what case?

CLOWN.
In Isbels case and mine own. Service is no heritage, and I think I
shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue of my body; for
they say barnes are blessings.

COUNTESS.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

CLOWN.
My poor body, madam, requires it; I am driven on by the flesh, and he
must needs go that the devil drives.

COUNTESS.
Is this all your worships reason?

CLOWN.
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such as they are.

COUNTESS.
May the world know them?

CLOWN.
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and all flesh and blood
are; and indeed I do marry that I may repent.

COUNTESS.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.

CLOWN.
I am out of friends, madam, and I hope to have friends for my wifes
sake.

COUNTESS.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

CLOWN.
Yare shallow, madam, in great friends; for the knaves come to do that
for me which I am a-weary of. He that ears my land spares my team, and
gives me leave to in the crop: if I be his cuckold, hes my drudge. He
that comforts my wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that
cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my
flesh and blood is my friend; ergo, he that kisses my wife is my
friend. If men could be contented to be what they are, there were no
fear in marriage; for young Charbon the puritan and old Poysam the
papist, howsomeer their hearts are severd in religion, their heads
are both one; they may jowl horns together like any deer i the herd.

COUNTESS.
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthd and calumnious knave?

CLOWN.
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next way:
   _For I the ballad will repeat,
   Which men full true shall find;
   Your marriage comes by destiny,
   Your cuckoo sings by kind._

COUNTESS.
Get you gone, sir; Ill talk with you more anon.

STEWARD.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to you; of her I am to
speak.

COUNTESS.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her; Helen I mean.

CLOWN.
[_Sings._]
_   Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
     Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
   Fond done, done fond,
      Was this King Priams joy?
   With that she sighed as she stood,
   With that she sighed as she stood,
      And gave this sentence then:
   Among nine bad if one be good,
   Among nine bad if one be good,
     Theres yet one good in ten._

COUNTESS.
What, one good in ten? You corrupt the song, sirrah.

CLOWN.
One good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o the song. Would
God would serve the world so all the year! Wed find no fault with the
tithe-woman, if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a! And we might
have a good woman born but or every blazing star, or at an earthquake,
twould mend the lottery well; a man may draw his heart out ere he
pluck one.

COUNTESS.
Youll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you!

CLOWN.
That man should be at womans command, and yet no hurt done! Though
honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the
surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am going,
forsooth; the business is for Helen to come hither.

 [_Exit._]

COUNTESS.
Well, now.

STEWARD.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.

COUNTESS.
Faith I do. Her father bequeathd her to me, and she herself, without
other advantage, may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds;
there is more owing her than is paid, and more shall be paid her than
shell demand.

STEWARD.
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think she wishd me; alone
she was, and did communicate to herself her own words to her own ears;
she thought, I dare vow for her, they touchd not any stranger sense.
Her matter was, she loved your son. Fortune, she said, was no goddess,
that had put such difference betwixt their two estates; Love no god,
that would not extend his might only where qualities were level; Diana
no queen of virgins, that would suffer her poor knight surprisd,
without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward. This she
deliverd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that eer I heard virgin
exclaim in, which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal;
sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns you something to
know it.

COUNTESS.
You have dischargd this honestly; keep it to yourself; many
likelihoods informd me of this before, which hung so tottering in the
balance that I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you leave me;
stall this in your bosom; and I thank you for your honest care. I will
speak with you further anon.

 [_Exit Steward._]

 Enter Helena.

Even so it was with me when I was young;
If ever we are natures, these are ours; this thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
It is the show and seal of natures truth,
Where loves strong passion is impressd in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick ont; I observe her now.

HELENA.
What is your pleasure, madam?

COUNTESS.
You know, Helen,
I am a mother to you.

HELENA.
Mine honourable mistress.

COUNTESS.
Nay, a mother.
Why not a mother? When I said a mother,
Methought you saw a serpent. Whats in mother,
That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine. Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds.
You neer oppressd me with a mothers groan,
Yet I express to you a mothers care.
Gods mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? Whats the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colourd Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why, that you are my daughter?

HELENA.
That I am not.

COUNTESS.
I say, I am your mother.

HELENA.
Pardon, madam;
The Count Rossillon cannot be my brother.
I am from humble, he from honoured name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble,
My master, my dear lord he is; and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother.

COUNTESS.
Nor I your mother?

HELENA.
You are my mother, madam; would you were
So that my lord your son were not my brother,
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Cant no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?

COUNTESS.
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse. What! pale again?
My fear hath catchd your fondness; now I see
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Your salt tears head. Now to all sense tis gross
You love my son; invention is ashamd,
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true;
But tell me then, tis so; for, look, thy cheeks
Confess it, tone to thother; and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours,
That in their kind they speak it; only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, ist so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forsweart: howeer, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly.

HELENA.
Good madam, pardon me.

COUNTESS.
Do you love my son?

HELENA.
Your pardon, noble mistress.

COUNTESS.
Love you my son?

HELENA.
Do not you love him, madam?

COUNTESS.
Go not about; my love hath int a bond
Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeachd.

HELENA.
Then I confess,
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
I love your son.
My friends were poor, but honest; sos my love.
Be not offended; for it hurts not him
That he is lovd of me; I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and inteemable sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love,
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever, in so true a flame of liking,
Wish chastely, and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love; O then, give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies!

COUNTESS.
Had you not lately an intent,speak truly,
To go to Paris?

HELENA.
Madam, I had.

COUNTESS.
Wherefore? tell true.

HELENA.
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and provd effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willd me
In heedfullst reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
There is a remedy, approvd, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The king is renderd lost.

COUNTESS.
This was your motive
For Paris, was it? Speak.

HELENA.
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the king,
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.

COUNTESS.
But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his physicians
Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him;
They, that they cannot help. How shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowelld of their doctrine, have let off
The danger to itself?

HELENA.
Theres something int
More than my fathers skill, which was the greatst
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th luckiest stars in heaven; and would your honour
But give me leave to try success, Id venture
The well-lost life of mine on his graces cure.
By such a day, an hour.

COUNTESS.
Dost thou believet?

HELENA.
Ay, madam, knowingly.

COUNTESS.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court. Ill stay at home,
And pray Gods blessing into thy attempt.
Be gone tomorrow; and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to, thou shalt not miss.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT II.

SCENE I. Paris. A room in the Kings palace.

 Flourish. Enter the King with young Lords taking leave for the
 Florentine war; Bertram, Parolles and Attendants.

KING.
Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles
Do not throw from you; and you, my lords, farewell;
Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as tis receivd,
And is enough for both.

FIRST LORD.
Tis our hope, sir,
After well-entred soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.

KING.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen; let higher Italy,
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchysee that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it, when
The bravest questant shrinks: find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.

SECOND LORD.
Health, at your bidding serve your majesty!

KING.
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them;
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand; beware of being captives
Before you serve.

BOTH.
Our hearts receive your warnings.

KING.
Farewell.Come hither to me.

 [_The King retires to a couch._]

FIRST LORD.
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

PAROLLES.
Tis not his fault; the spark.

SECOND LORD.
O, tis brave wars!

PAROLLES.
Most admirable! I have seen those wars.

BERTRAM.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with,
Too young, and the next year and tis too early.

PAROLLES.
An thy mind stand tot, boy, steal away bravely.

BERTRAM.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, Ill steal away.

FIRST LORD.
Theres honour in the theft.

PAROLLES.
Commit it, count.

SECOND LORD.
I am your accessary; and so farewell.

BERTRAM.
I grow to you, and our parting is a torturd body.

FIRST LORD.
Farewell, captain.

SECOND LORD.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!

PAROLLES.
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good sparks and lustrous, a
word, good metals. You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here on his
sinister cheek; it was this very sword entrenchd it. Say to him I
live; and observe his reports for me.

FIRST LORD.
We shall, noble captain.

PAROLLES.
Mars dote on you for his novices!

 [_Exeunt Lords._]

What will ye do?

BERTRAM.
Stay the king.

PAROLLES.
Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords; you have restraind
yourself within the list of too cold an adieu. Be more expressive to
them; for they wear themselves in the cap of the time; there do muster
true gait; eat, speak, and move, under the influence of the most
receivd star; and though the devil lead the measure, such are to be
followed. After them, and take a more dilated farewell.

BERTRAM.
And I will do so.

PAROLLES.
Worthy fellows, and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.

 [_Exeunt Bertram and Parolles._]

 Enter Lafew.

LAFEW.
Pardon, my lord [_kneeling_], for me and for my tidings.

KING.
Ill fee thee to stand up.

LAFEW.
Then heres a man stands that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneeld, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

KING.
I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
And askd thee mercy fort.

LAFEW.
Good faith, across;
But, my good lord, tis thus: will you be curd
Of your infirmity?

KING.
No.

LAFEW.
O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, and if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
Thats able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion; whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen ins hand
And write to her a love-line.

KING.
What her is this?

LAFEW.
Why, doctor she! My lord, theres one arrivd,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy, hath amazd me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her,
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

KING.
Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration; that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondring how thou tookst it.

LAFEW.
Nay, Ill fit you,
And not be all day neither.

 [_Exit Lafew._]

KING.
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

 Enter Lafew with Helena.

LAFEW.
Nay, come your ways.

KING.
This haste hath wings indeed.

LAFEW.
Nay, come your ways.
This is his majesty, say your mind to him.
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His majesty seldom fears; I am Cressids uncle,
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.

 [_Exit._]

KING.
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

HELENA.
Ay, my good lord.
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess, well found.

KING.
I knew him.

HELENA.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On his bed of death
Many receipts he gave me; chiefly one,
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience the only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two; more dear I have so,
And hearing your high majesty is touchd
With that malignant cause, wherein the honour
Of my dear fathers gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance,
With all bound humbleness.

KING.
We thank you, maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us, and
The congregated college have concluded
That labouring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidable estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.

HELENA.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one to bear me back again.

KING.
I cannot give thee less, to be calld grateful.
Thou thoughtst to help me; and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou knowst no part;
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

HELENA.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the greatst been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises; and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest, and despair most fits.

KING.
I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid.
Thy pains, not usd, must by thyself be paid;
Proffers, not took, reap thanks for their reward.

HELENA.
Inspired merit so by breath is barrd.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor, that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think, and think I know most sure,
My art is not past power nor you past cure.

KING.
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hopst thou my cure?

HELENA.
The greatest grace lending grace.
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenchd her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilots glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass;
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.

KING.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What darst thou venture?

HELENA.
Tax of impudence,
A strumpets boldness, a divulged shame,
Traducd by odious ballads; my maidens name
Seard otherwise; ne worse of worst extended
With vildest torture, let my life be ended.

KING.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak;
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite, or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

HELENA.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deservd. Not helping, deaths my fee;
But if I help, what do you promise me?

KING.
Make thy demand.

HELENA.
But will you make it even?

KING.
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.

HELENA.
Then shalt thou give me, with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

KING.
Here is my hand; the premises observd,
Thy will by my performance shall be servd;
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolvd patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou camst, how tended on; but rest
Unquestiond welcome, and undoubted blessd.
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Enter Countess and Clown.

COUNTESS.
Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of your breeding.

CLOWN.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I know my business is
but to the court.

COUNTESS.
To the court! Why, what place make you special, when you put off that
with such contempt? But to the court!

CLOWN.
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he may easily put it
off at court: he that cannot make a leg, put offs cap, kiss his hand,
and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed such
a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the court; but for me, I have
an answer will serve all men.

COUNTESS.
Marry, thats a bountiful answer that fits all questions.

CLOWN.
It is like a barbers chair, that fits all buttocksthe pin-buttock,
the quatch-buttock, the brawn-buttock, or any buttock.

COUNTESS.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

CLOWN.
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your French
crown for your taffety punk, as Tibs rush for Toms forefinger, as a
pancake for Shrove-Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding quean to a wrangling
knave, as the nuns lip to the friars mouth; nay, as the pudding to
his skin.

COUNTESS.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all questions?

CLOWN.
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit any
question.

COUNTESS.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit all demands.

CLOWN.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should speak truth
of it. Here it is, and all that belongs tot. Ask me if I am a
courtier; it shall do you no harm to learn.

COUNTESS.
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in question, hoping to
be the wiser by your answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Theres a simple putting off. More, more, a hundred of
them.

COUNTESS.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick; spare not me.

COUNTESS.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me tot, I warrant you.

COUNTESS.
You were lately whippd, sir, as I think.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Spare not me.

COUNTESS.
Do you cry O Lord, sir! at your whipping, and spare not me? Indeed
your O Lord, sir! is very sequent to your whipping. You would answer
very well to a whipping, if you were but bound tot.

CLOWN.
I neer had worse luck in my life in my O Lord, sir! I see things may
serve long, but not serve ever.

COUNTESS.
I play the noble housewife with the time, to entertain it so merrily
with a fool.

CLOWN.
O Lord, sir! Why, theret serves well again.

COUNTESS.
An end, sir! To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.

CLOWN.
Not much commendation to them?

COUNTESS.
Not much employment for you. You understand me?

CLOWN.
Most fruitfully. I am there before my legs.

COUNTESS.
Haste you again.

 [_Exeunt severally._]

SCENE III. Paris. The Kings palace.

 Enter Bertram, Lafew and Parolles.

LAFEW.
They say miracles are past; and we have our philosophical persons to
make modern and familiar things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it
that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves into seeming
knowledge when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

PAROLLES.
Why, tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot out in our
latter times.

BERTRAM.
And so tis.

LAFEW.
To be relinquishd of the artists,

PAROLLES.
So I say; both of Galen and Paracelsus.

LAFEW.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,

PAROLLES.
Right; so I say.

LAFEW.
That gave him out incurable,

PAROLLES.
Why, there tis; so say I too.

LAFEW.
Not to be helped.

PAROLLES.
Right; as twere a man assurd of a

LAFEW.
Uncertain life and sure death.

PAROLLES.
Just; you say well. So would I have said.

LAFEW.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.

PAROLLES.
It is indeed; if you will have it in showing, you shall read it in what
do you call there?

LAFEW.
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.

PAROLLES.
Thats it; I would have said the very same.

LAFEW.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier; fore me, I speak in respect

PAROLLES.
Nay, tis strange, tis very strange; that is the brief and the tedious
of it; and hes of a most facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge
it to be the

LAFEW.
Very hand of heaven.

PAROLLES.
Ay, so I say.

LAFEW.
In a most weak

PAROLLES.
And debile minister, great power, great transcendence, which should
indeed give us a further use to be made than alone the recovry of the
king, as to be

LAFEW.
Generally thankful.

PAROLLES.
I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.

 Enter King, Helena and Attendants.

LAFEW.
Lustique, as the Dutchman says. Ill like a maid the better, whilst I
have a tooth in my head. Why, hes able to lead her a coranto.

PAROLLES.
_Mor du vinager!_ is not this Helen?

LAFEW.
Fore God, I think so.

KING.
Go, call before me all the lords in court.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

Sit, my preserver, by thy patients side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banishd sense
Thou has repeald, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promisd gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

 Enter several Lords.

Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
Oer whom both sovereign power and fathers voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make;
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

HELENA.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall, when love please! Marry, to each but one!

LAFEW.
Id give bay curtal and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken than these boys,
And writ as little beard.

KING.
Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.

 She addresses her to a Lord.

HELENA.
Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restord the king to health.

ALL.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.

HELENA.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it, your majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
Well neer come there again.

KING.
Make choice; and, see,
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

HELENA.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream. [_To first Lord._] Sir, will you hear my suit?

FIRST LORD.
And grant it.

HELENA.
Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.

LAFEW.
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for my life.

HELENA.
[_To second Lord._] The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threatningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love!

SECOND LORD.
No better, if you please.

HELENA.
My wish receive,
Which great Love grant; and so I take my leave.

LAFEW.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine Id have them whippd;
or I would send them to th Turk to make eunuchs of.

HELENA.
[_To third Lord._] Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
Ill never do you wrong for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!

LAFEW.
These boys are boys of ice, theyll none have her. Sure, they are
bastards to the English; the French neer got em.

HELENA.
[_To fourth Lord._] You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood.

FOURTH LORD.
Fair one, I think not so.

LAFEW.
Theres one grape yet. I am sure thy father drank wine. But if thou
beest not an ass, I am a youth of fourteen; I have known thee already.

HELENA.
[_To Bertram._] I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. This is the man.

KING.
Why, then, young Bertram, take her; shes thy wife.

BERTRAM.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

KING.
Knowst thou not, Bertram,
What she has done for me?

BERTRAM.
Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.

KING.
Thou knowst she has raisd me from my sickly bed.

BERTRAM.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my fathers charge:
A poor physicians daughter my wife! Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!

KING.
Tis only title thou disdainst in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of colour, weight, and heat, pourd all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikst,
A poor physicians daughter,thou dislikst
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doers deed.
Where great additions swells, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Is good without a name; vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature shes immediate heir;
And these breed honour: that is honours scorn
Which challenges itself as honours born,
And is not like the sire. Honours thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our fore-goers. The mere words a slave,
Debauchd on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damnd oblivion is the tomb
Of honourd bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest. Virtue and she
Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.

BERTRAM.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do t.

KING.
Thou wrongst thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.

HELENA.
That you are well restord, my lord, I am glad.
Let the rest go.

KING.
My honours at the stake, which to defeat,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honour where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good;
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims;
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak! Thine answer!

BERTRAM.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation, and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the king; who, so ennobled,
Is as twere born so.

KING.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine; to whom I promise
A counterpoise; if not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.

BERTRAM.
I take her hand.

KING.
Good fortune and the favour of the king
Smile upon this contract; whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
And be performd tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lovst her,
Thy loves to me religious; else, does err.

 [_Exeunt King, Bertram, Helena, Lords, and Attendants._]

LAFEW.
Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

PAROLLES.
Your pleasure, sir.

LAFEW.
Your lord and master did well to make his recantation.

PAROLLES.
Recantation! My lord! My master!

LAFEW.
Ay. Is it not a language I speak?

PAROLLES.
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody succeeding.
My master!

LAFEW.
Are you companion to the Count Rossillon?

PAROLLES.
To any count; to all counts; to what is man.

LAFEW.
To what is counts man: counts master is of another style.

PAROLLES.
You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.

LAFEW.
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which title age cannot bring
thee.

PAROLLES.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.

LAFEW.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty wise fellow; thou
didst make tolerable vent of thy travel; it might pass. Yet the scarfs
and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from believing
thee a vessel of too great a burden. I have now found thee; when I lose
thee again I care not. Yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and
that thou art scarce worth.

PAROLLES.
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee

LAFEW.
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou hasten thy trial;
which ifLord have mercy on thee for a hen! So, my good window of
lattice, fare thee well; thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.

PAROLLES.
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.

LAFEW.
Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.

PAROLLES.
I have not, my lord, deservd it.

LAFEW.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it; and I will not bate thee a scruple.

PAROLLES.
Well, I shall be wiser.

LAFEW.
Evn as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a smack o th
contrary. If ever thou beest bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt
find what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold my
acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the
default, He is a man I know.

PAROLLES.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.

LAFEW.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor doing eternal; for
doing I am past, as I will by thee, in what motion age will give me
leave.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me; scurvy, old,
filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient; there is no fettering of
authority. Ill beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any
convenience, an he were double and double a lord. Ill have no more
pity of his age than I would have ofIll beat him, and if I could but
meet him again.

 Enter Lafew.

LAFEW.
Sirrah, your lord and masters married; theres news for you; you have
a new mistress.

PAROLLES.
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some reservation of
your wrongs. He is my good lord; whom I serve above is my master.

LAFEW.
Who? God?

PAROLLES.
Ay, sir.

LAFEW.
The devil it is thats thy master. Why dost thou garter up thy arms o
this fashion? Dost make hose of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou
wert best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine honour, if
I were but two hours younger, Id beat thee. Methinkst thou art a
general offence, and every man should beat thee. I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.

PAROLLES.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.

LAFEW.
Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a
pomegranate; you are a vagabond, and no true traveller. You are more
saucy with lords and honourable personages than the commission of your
birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not worth another word,
else Id call you knave. I leave you.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Bertram.

PAROLLES.
Good, very good, it is so then. Good, very good; let it be conceald
awhile.

BERTRAM.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!

PAROLLES.
Whats the matter, sweetheart?

BERTRAM.
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.

PAROLLES.
What, what, sweetheart?

BERTRAM.
O my Parolles, they have married me!
Ill to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.

PAROLLES.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
The tread of a mans foot: to the wars!

BERTRAM.
Theres letters from my mother; what th import is
I know not yet.

PAROLLES.
Ay, that would be known. To th wars, my boy, to th wars!
He wears his honour in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Marss fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable; we that dwell int, jades,
Therefore, to th war!

BERTRAM.
It shall be so; Ill send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the king
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. War is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.

PAROLLES.
Will this caprichio hold in thee, art sure?

BERTRAM.
Go with me to my chamber and advise me.
Ill send her straight away. Tomorrow
Ill to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

PAROLLES.
Why, these balls bound; theres noise in it. Tis hard:
A young man married is a man thats marrd.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go.
The king has done you wrong; but hush tis so.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Paris. The Kings palace.

 Enter Helena and Clown.

HELENA.
My mother greets me kindly: is she well?

CLOWN.
She is not well, but yet she has her health; shes very merry, but yet
she is not well. But thanks be given, shes very well, and wants
nothing i the world; but yet she is not well.

HELENA.
If she be very well, what does she ail that shes not very well?

CLOWN.
Truly, shes very well indeed, but for two things.

HELENA.
What two things?

CLOWN.
One, that shes not in heaven, whither God send her quickly! The other,
that shes in earth, from whence God send her quickly!

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Bless you, my fortunate lady!

HELENA.
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own good fortune.

PAROLLES.
You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them on, have them
still. O, my knave how does my old lady?

CLOWN.
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I would she did as you
say.

PAROLLES.
Why, I say nothing.

CLOWN.
Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a mans tongue shakes out his
masters undoing. To say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and
to have nothing, is to be a great part of your title; which is within a
very little of nothing.

PAROLLES.
Away! Thou art a knave.

CLOWN.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thou art a knave; that is
before me thou art a knave. This had been truth, sir.

PAROLLES.
Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.

CLOWN.
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you taught to find me? The
search, sir, was profitable; and much fool may you find in you, even to
the worlds pleasure and the increase of laughter.

PAROLLES.
A good knave, i faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and right of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
But puts it off to a compelld restraint;
Whose want, and whose delay, is strewd with sweets;
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour oerflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.

HELENA.
Whats his will else?

PAROLLES.
That you will take your instant leave o the king,
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthend with what apology you think
May make it probable need.

HELENA.
What more commands he?

PAROLLES.
That, having this obtaind, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

HELENA.
In everything I wait upon his will.

PAROLLES.
I shall report it so.

HELENA.
I pray you. Come, sirrah.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Another room in the same.

 Enter Lafew and Bertram.

LAFEW.
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.

BERTRAM.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.

LAFEW.
You have it from his own deliverance.

BERTRAM.
And by other warranted testimony.

LAFEW.
Then my dial goes not true; I took this lark for a bunting.

BERTRAM.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in knowledge, and
accordingly valiant.

LAFEW.
I have, then, sinned against his experience and transgressed against
his valour; and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find
in my heart to repent. Here he comes; I pray you make us friends; I
will pursue the amity

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
[_To Bertram._] These things shall be done, sir.

LAFEW.
Pray you, sir, whos his tailor?

PAROLLES.
Sir!

LAFEW.
O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, is a good workman, a very good
tailor.

BERTRAM.
[_Aside to Parolles._] Is she gone to the king?

PAROLLES.
She is.

BERTRAM.
Will she away tonight?

PAROLLES.
As youll have her.

BERTRAM.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses; and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.

LAFEW.
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner; but one
that lies three-thirds and uses a known truth to pass a thousand
nothings with, should be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you,
Captain.

BERTRAM.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?

PAROLLES.
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lords displeasure.

LAFEW.
You have made shift to run into t, boots and spurs and all, like him
that leapt into the custard; and out of it youll run again, rather
than suffer question for your residence.

BERTRAM.
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.

LAFEW.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at his prayers. Fare you well,
my lord; and believe this of me, there can be no kernal in this light
nut; the soul of this man is his clothes; trust him not in matter of
heavy consequence; I have kept of them tame, and know their natures.
Farewell, monsieur; I have spoken better of you than you have or will
to deserve at my hand; but we must do good against evil.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
An idle lord, I swear.

BERTRAM.
I think so.

PAROLLES.
Why, do you not know him?

BERTRAM.
Yes, I do know him well; and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.

 Enter Helena.

HELENA.
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the king, and have procurd his leave
For present parting; only he desires
Some private speech with you.

BERTRAM.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you;
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you:
For my respects are better than they seem;
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother.

 [_Giving a letter._]

Twill be two days ere I shall see you; so
I leave you to your wisdom.

HELENA.
Sir, I can nothing say
But that I am your most obedient servant.

BERTRAM.
Come, come, no more of that.

HELENA.
And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have faild
To equal my great fortune.

BERTRAM.
Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell; hie home.

HELENA.
Pray, sir, your pardon.

BERTRAM.
Well, what would you say?

HELENA.
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe;
Nor dare I say tis mine, and yet it is;
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

BERTRAM.
What would you have?

HELENA.
Something; and scarce so much; nothing indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. Faith, yes,
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

BERTRAM.
I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse.

HELENA.
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.
Where are my other men, monsieur?
Farewell,

 [_Exit Helena._]

BERTRAM.
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.
Away, and for our flight.

PAROLLES.
Bravely, coragio!

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT III.

SCENE I. Florence. A room in the Dukes palace.

 Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence attended; two French Lords, and
 Soldiers.

DUKE.
So that, from point to point, now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth,
And more thirsts after.

FIRST LORD.
Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Graces part; black and fearful
On the opposer.

DUKE.
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would, in so just a business, shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

SECOND LORD.
Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessd.

DUKE.
Be it his pleasure.

FIRST LORD.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.

DUKE.
Welcome shall they be;
And all the honours that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well;
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to the field.

 [_Flourish. Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Enter Countess and Clown.

COUNTESS.
It hath happend all as I would have had it, save that he comes not
along with her.

CLOWN.
By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very melancholy man.

COUNTESS.
By what observance, I pray you?

CLOWN.
Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and sing; ask
questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. I know a man that had this
trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

COUNTESS.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.

 [_Opening a letter._]

CLOWN.
I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our old lings and our
Isbels o th country are nothing like your old ling and your Isbels o
th court. The brains of my Cupids knockd out, and I begin to love,
as an old man loves money, with no stomach.

COUNTESS.
What have we here?

CLOWN.
Een that you have there.

 [_Exit._]

COUNTESS.
[_Reads._] _I have sent you a daughter-in-law; she hath recovered the
king and undone me. I have wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to
make the not eternal. You shall hear I am run away; know it before
the report come. If there be breadth enough in the world, I will hold a
long distance. My duty to you.
              Your unfortunate son,_
                            BERTRAM.

This is not well, rash and unbridled boy,
To fly the favours of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
O madam, yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers and my young
lady.

COUNTESS.
What is the matter?

CLOWN.
Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some comfort; your son will not
be killd so soon as I thought he would.

COUNTESS.
Why should he be killd?

CLOWN.
So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does; the danger is in
standing tot; thats the loss of men, though it be the getting of
children. Here they come will tell you more. For my part, I only hear
your son was run away.

 [_Exit._]

 Enter Helena and the two Gentlemen.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Save you, good madam.

HELENA.
Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Do not say so.

COUNTESS.
Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto t. Where is my son, I pray you?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Madam, hes gone to serve the Duke of Florence;
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some despatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.

HELENA.
Look on this letter, madam; heres my passport.

[_Reads._] _When thou canst get the ring upon my finger, which never
shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy body that I am
father to, then call me husband; but in such a then I write a
never._
This is a dreadful sentence.

COUNTESS.
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam; And for the contents sake, are sorry for our pains.

COUNTESS.
I prythee, lady, have a better cheer;
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robbst me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam.

COUNTESS.
And to be a soldier?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
Such is his noble purpose, and, believet,
The duke will lay upon him all the honour
That good convenience claims.

COUNTESS.
Return you thither?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

HELENA.
[_Reads._] _Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France._
Tis bitter.

COUNTESS.
Find you that there?

HELENA.
Ay, madam.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Tis but the boldness of his hand haply, which his heart was not
consenting to.

COUNTESS.
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
Theres nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
A servant only, and a gentleman which I have sometime known.

COUNTESS.
Parolles, was it not?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Ay, my good lady, he.

COUNTESS.
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much,
Which holds him much to have.

COUNTESS.
Yare welcome, gentlemen.
I will entreat you, when you see my son,
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honour that he loses: more Ill entreat you
Written to bear along.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.

COUNTESS.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?

 [_Exeunt Countess and Gentlemen._]

HELENA.
Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.
Nothing in France until he has no wife!
Thou shalt have none, Rossillon, none in France;
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, ist I
That chase thee from thy country, and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-peering air,
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him tot;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better twere
I met the ravin lion when he roard
With sharp constraint of hunger; better twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No; come thou home, Rossillon,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone;
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to dot? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house,
And angels officd all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, Ill steal away.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. Florence. Before the Dukes palace.

 Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, Bertram, drum and trumpets,
 Soldiers, Parolles.

DUKE.
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.

BERTRAM.
Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength; but yet
Well strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To thextreme edge of hazard.

DUKE.
Then go thou forth;
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm,
As thy auspicious mistress!

BERTRAM.
This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file;
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Enter Countess and Steward.

COUNTESS.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done,
By sending me a letter? Read it again.

STEWARD.
[_Reads._] _I am Saint Jaques pilgrim, thither gone.
Ambitious love hath so in me offended
That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
His name with zealous fervour sanctify.
His taken labours bid him me forgive;
I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
From courtly friends, with camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dog the heels of worth.
He is too good and fair for death and me;
Whom I myself embrace to set him free._

COUNTESS.
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rynaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so; had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.

STEWARD.
Pardon me, madam;
If I had given you this at over-night,
She might have been oertaen; and yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

COUNTESS.
What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rynaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife;
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth,
That he does weigh too light; my greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak;
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Without the walls of Florence.

 Enter an old Widow of Florence, Diana, Violenta, Mariana and other
 Citizens.

WIDOW.
Nay, come; for if they do approach the city, we shall lose all the
sight.

DIANA.
They say the French count has done most honourable service.

WIDOW.
It is reported that he has taken their greatst commander, and that
with his own hand he slew the dukes brother.

 [_A tucket afar off._]

We have lost our labour; they are gone a contrary way. Hark! you may
know by their trumpets.

MARIANA.
Come, lets return again, and suffice ourselves with the report of it.
Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl; the honour of a maid is her
name; and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

WIDOW.
I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a gentleman his
companion.

MARIANA.
I know that knave; hang him! one Parolles; a filthy officer he is in
those suggestions for the young earl. Beware of them, Diana; their
promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of lust,
are not the things they go under; many a maid hath been seduced by
them; and the misery is, example, that so terrible shows in the wreck
of maidenhood, cannot for all that dissuade succession, but that they
are limed with the twigs that threaten them. I hope I need not to
advise you further; but I hope your own grace will keep you where you
are, though there were no further danger known but the modesty which is
so lost.

DIANA.
You shall not need to fear me.

 Enter Helena in the dress of a pilgrim.

WIDOW.
I hope so. Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at my house;
thither they send one another; Ill question her. God save you,
pilgrim! Whither are bound?

HELENA.
To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

WIDOW.
At the Saint Francis here, beside the port.

HELENA.
Is this the way?

 [_A march afar._]

WIDOW.
Ay, marry, ist. Hark you, they come this way.
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodgd;
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.

HELENA.
Is it yourself?

WIDOW.
If you shall please so, pilgrim.

HELENA.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

WIDOW.
You came, I think, from France?

HELENA.
I did so.

WIDOW.
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.

HELENA.
His name, I pray you.

DIANA.
The Count Rossillon. Know you such a one?

HELENA.
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him;
His face I know not.

DIANA.
Whatsomeer he is,
Hes bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As tis reported, for the king had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

HELENA.
Ay, surely, mere the truth; I know his lady.

DIANA.
There is a gentleman that serves the count
Reports but coarsely of her.

HELENA.
Whats his name?

DIANA.
Monsieur Parolles.

HELENA.
O, I believe with him,
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated; all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examind.

DIANA.
Alas, poor lady!
Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.

WIDOW.
Ay, right; good creature, wheresoeer she is,
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do her
A shrewd turn, if she pleasd.

HELENA.
How do you mean?
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose.

WIDOW.
He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honour of a maid;
But she is armd for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defence.

 Enter, with a drum and colours, a party of the Florentine army,
 Bertram and Parolles.

MARIANA.
The gods forbid else!

WIDOW.
So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Dukes eldest son;
That Escalus.

HELENA.
Which is the Frenchman?

DIANA.
He;
That with the plume; tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he lovd his wife; if he were honester
He were much goodlier. Ist not a handsome gentleman?

HELENA.
I like him well.

DIANA.
Tis pity he is not honest. Yonds that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady
I would poison that vile rascal.

HELENA.
Which is he?

DIANA.
That jack-an-apes with scarfs. Why is he melancholy?

HELENA.
Perchance hes hurt i the battle.

PAROLLES.
Lose our drum! Well.

MARIANA.
Hes shrewdly vexd at something. Look, he has spied us.

WIDOW.
Marry, hang you!

MARIANA.
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier!

 [_Exeunt Bertram, Parolles, Officers and Soldiers._]

WIDOW.
The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host; of enjoind penitents
Theres four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.

HELENA.
I humbly thank you.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight; the charge and thanking
Shall be for me; and, to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin,
Worthy the note.

BOTH.
Well take your offer kindly.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Camp before Florence.

 Enter Bertram and the two French Lords.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, good my lord, put him tot; let him have his way.

SECOND LORD.
If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no more in your
respect.

FIRST LORD.
On my life, my lord, a bubble.

BERTRAM.
Do you think I am so far deceived in him?

FIRST LORD.
Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct knowledge, without any malice,
but to speak of him as my kinsman, hes a most notable coward, an
infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner of no
one good quality worthy your lordships entertainment.

SECOND LORD.
It were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his virtue, which
he hath not, he might at some great and trusty business, in a main
danger fail you.

BERTRAM.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.

SECOND LORD.
None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which you hear him so
confidently undertake to do.

FIRST LORD.
I with a troop of Florentines will suddenly surprise him; such I will
have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy; we will bind and
hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried
into the leaguer of the adversaries when we bring him to our own tents.
Be but your lordship present at his examination; if he do not for the
promise of his life, and in the highest compulsion of base fear, offer
to betray you, and deliver all the intelligence in his power against
you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never
trust my judgment in anything.

SECOND LORD.
O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he says he has a
stratagem fort. When your lordship sees the bottom of his success
int, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be melted, if
you give him not John Drums entertainment, your inclining cannot be
removed. Here he comes.

 Enter Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
O, for the love of laughter, hinder not the honour of his design: let
him fetch off his drum in any hand.

BERTRAM.
How now, monsieur! This drum sticks sorely in your disposition.

SECOND LORD.
A pox on t; let it go; tis but a drum.

PAROLLES.
But a drum! Ist but a drum? A drum so lost! There was excellent
command, to charge in with our horse upon our own wings, and to rend
our own soldiers.

SECOND LORD.
That was not to be blamd in the command of the service; it was a
disaster of war that Caesar himself could not have prevented, if he had
been there to command.

BERTRAM.
Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some dishonour we had in
the loss of that drum, but it is not to be recovered.

PAROLLES.
It might have been recovered.

BERTRAM.
It might, but it is not now.

PAROLLES.
It is to be recovered. But that the merit of service is seldom
attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have that drum or
another, or _hic jacet_.

BERTRAM.
Why, if you have a stomach, tot, monsieur, if you think your mystery
in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour again into his native
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise, and go on; I will grace the
attempt for a worthy exploit; if you speed well in it, the duke shall
both speak of it and extend to you what further becomes his greatness,
even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness.

PAROLLES.
By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

BERTRAM.
But you must not now slumber in it.

PAROLLES.
Ill about it this evening; and I will presently pen down my dilemmas,
encourage myself in my certainty, put myself into my mortal
preparation; and by midnight look to hear further from me.

BERTRAM.
May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?

PAROLLES.
I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the attempt I vow.

BERTRAM.
I know thart valiant; and to the possibility of thy soldiership, will
subscribe for thee. Farewell.

PAROLLES.
I love not many words.

 [_Exit._]

FIRST LORD.
No more than a fish loves water. Is not this a strange fellow, my lord,
that so confidently seems to undertake this business, which he knows is
not to be done; damns himself to do, and dares better be damnd than to
dot.

SECOND LORD.
You do not know him, my lord, as we do; certain it is that he will
steal himself into a mans favour, and for a week escape a great deal
of discoveries, but when you find him out, you have him ever after.

BERTRAM.
Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of this, that so
seriously he does address himself unto?

FIRST LORD.
None in the world; but return with an invention, and clap upon you two
or three probable lies; but we have almost embossed him; you shall see
his fall tonight; for indeed he is not for your lordships respect.

SECOND LORD.
Well make you some sport with the fox ere we case him. He was first
smokd by the old Lord Lafew; when his disguise and he is parted, tell
me what a sprat you shall find him; which you shall see this very
night.

FIRST LORD.
I must go look my twigs. He shall be caught.

BERTRAM.
Your brother, he shall go along with me.

FIRST LORD.
Ast please your lordship. Ill leave you.

 [_Exit._]

BERTRAM.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The lass I spoke of.

SECOND LORD.
But you say shes honest.

BERTRAM.
Thats all the fault. I spoke with her but once,
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her
By this same coxcomb that we have i the wind
Tokens and letters which she did re-send,
And this is all I have done. Shes a fair creature;
Will you go see her?

SECOND LORD.
With all my heart, my lord.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VII. Florence. A room in the Widows house.

 Enter Helena and Widow.

HELENA.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

WIDOW.
Though my estate be falln, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

HELENA.
Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust, the count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

WIDOW.
I should believe you,
For you have showd me that which well approves
Yare great in fortune.

HELENA.
Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will over-pay, and pay again
When I have found it. The count he woos your daughter
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolvd to carry her; let her in fine consent,
As well direct her how tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That shell demand; a ring the county wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice; yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
Howeer repented after.

WIDOW.
Now I see
The bottom of your purpose.

HELENA.
You see it lawful then; it is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, Ill add three thousand crowns
To what is passd already.

WIDOW.
I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts, and songs composd
To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves; for he persists
As if his life lay on t.

HELENA.
Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot; which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But lets about it.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT IV.

SCENE I. Without the Florentine camp.

 Enter first Lord with five or six Soldiers in ambush.

FIRST LORD.
He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner. When you sally upon
him, speak what terrible language you will; though you understand it
not yourselves, no matter; for we must not seem to understand him,
unless someone among us, whom we must produce for an interpreter.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Good captain, let me be th interpreter.

FIRST LORD.
Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy voice?

FIRST SOLDIER.
No sir, I warrant you.

FIRST LORD.
But what linsey-woolsey has thou to speak to us again?

FIRST SOLDIER.
Een such as you speak to me.

FIRST LORD.
He must think us some band of strangers i the adversarys
entertainment. Now he hath a smack of all neighbouring languages,
therefore we must every one be a man of his own fancy; not to know what
we speak one to another, so we seem to know, is to know straight our
purpose: choughs language, gabble enough, and good enough. As for you,
interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch, ho! Here he comes;
to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies
he forges.

 Enter Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Ten oclock. Within these three hours twill be time enough to go home.
What shall I say I have done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces have of late knockd
too often at my door. I find my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart
hath the fear of Mars before it, and of his creatures, not daring the
reports of my tongue.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] This is the first truth that eer thine own tongue was
guilty of.

PAROLLES.
What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum,
being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing I had no such
purpose? I must give myself some hurts, and say I got them in exploit;
yet slight ones will not carry it. They will say Came you off with so
little? and great ones I dare not give. Wherefore, whats the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-womans mouth, and buy
myself another of Bajazets mule, if you prattle me into these perils.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Is it possible he should know what he is, and be that he is?

PAROLLES.
I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn, or the
breaking of my Spanish sword.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] We cannot afford you so.

PAROLLES.
Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in stratagem.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Twould not do.

PAROLLES.
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Hardly serve.

PAROLLES.
Though I swore I leapd from the window of the citadel,

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] How deep?

PAROLLES.
Thirty fathom.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.

PAROLLES.
I would I had any drum of the enemys; I would swear I recoverd it.

FIRST LORD.
[_Aside._] You shall hear one anon.

PAROLLES.
A drum now of the enemys!

 [_Alarum within._]

FIRST LORD.
_Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo._

ALL.
_Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo._

 [_They seize and blindfold him._]

PAROLLES.
O, ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Boskos thromuldo boskos._

PAROLLES.
I know you are the Muskos regiment,
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German, or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me,
Ill discover that which shall undo the Florentine.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Boskos vauvado._ I understand thee, and can speak thy tongue.
_Kerelybonto._ Sir, Betake thee to thy faith, for seventeen poniards
are at thy bosom.

PAROLLES.
O!

FIRST SOLDIER.
O, pray, pray, pray!
_Manka revania dulche._

FIRST LORD.
_Oscorbidulchos volivorco._

FIRST SOLDIER.
The General is content to spare thee yet;
And, hoodwinkd as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.

PAROLLES.
O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp Ill show,
Their force, their purposes; nay, Ill speak that
Which you will wonder at.

FIRST SOLDIER.
But wilt thou faithfully?

PAROLLES.
If I do not, damn me.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Acordo linta._
Come on; thou art granted space.

 [_Exit, with Parolles guarded._]

 A short alarum within.

FIRST LORD.
Go tell the Count Rossillon and my brother
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.

SECOND SOLDIER.
Captain, I will.

FIRST LORD.
A will betray us all unto ourselves;
Inform on that.

SECOND SOLDIER.
So I will, sir.

FIRST LORD.
Till then Ill keep him dark, and safely lockd.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Florence. A room in the Widows house.

 Enter Bertram and Diana.

BERTRAM.
They told me that your name was Fontybell.

DIANA.
No, my good lord, Diana.

BERTRAM.
Titled goddess;
And worth it, with addition! But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument;
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now; for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.

DIANA.
She then was honest.

BERTRAM.
So should you be.

DIANA.
No.
My mother did but duty; such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.

BERTRAM.
No more a that!
I prythee do not strive against my vows;
I was compelld to her; but I love thee
By loves own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIANA.
Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you; but when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves,
And mock us with our bareness.

BERTRAM.
How have I sworn?

DIANA.
Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vowd true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the highest to witness: then, pray you, tell me,
If I should swear by Joves great attributes
I lovd you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill? This has no holding,
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions; but unseald,
At least in my opinion.

BERTRAM.
Change it, change it.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy;
And my integrity neer knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.

DIANA.
I see that men make hopes in such a case,
That well forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.

BERTRAM.
Ill lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.

DIANA.
Will you not, my lord?

BERTRAM.
It is an honour longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i the world
In me to lose.

DIANA.
Mine honours such a ring;
My chastitys the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i the world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion honour on my part
Against your vain assault.

BERTRAM.
Here, take my ring;
My house, mine honour, yea, my life be thine,
And Ill be bid by thee.

DIANA.
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber window;
Ill order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquerd my yet maiden-bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong; and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be deliverd;
And on your finger in the night, Ill put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

BERTRAM.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.

 [_Exit._]

DIANA.
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sat ins heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wifes dead; therefore Ill lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise, I thinkt no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. The Florentine camp.

 Enter the two French Lords and two or three Soldiers.

FIRST LORD.
You have not given him his mothers letter?

SECOND LORD.
I have delivred it an hour since; there is something int that stings
his nature; for on the reading it, he changd almost into another man.

FIRST LORD.
He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off so good a wife
and so sweet a lady.

SECOND LORD.
Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king,
who had even tund his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

FIRST LORD.
When you have spoken it, tis dead, and I am the grave of it.

SECOND LORD.
He hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in Florence, of a most
chaste renown, and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her
honour; he hath given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself made
in the unchaste composition.

FIRST LORD.
Now, God delay our rebellion! As we are ourselves, what things are we!

SECOND LORD.
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of all treasons,
we still see them reveal themselves till they attain to their abhorrd
ends; so he that in this action contrives against his own nobility, in
his proper stream, oerflows himself.

FIRST LORD.
Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of our unlawful
intents? We shall not then have his company tonight?

SECOND LORD.
Not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.

FIRST LORD.
That approaches apace. I would gladly have him see his company
anatomized, that he might take a measure of his own judgments, wherein
so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

SECOND LORD.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his presence must be the
whip of the other.

FIRST LORD.
In the meantime, what hear you of these wars?

SECOND LORD.
I hear there is an overture of peace.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

SECOND LORD.
What will Count Rossillon do then? Will he travel higher, or return
again into France?

FIRST LORD.
I perceive by this demand, you are not altogether of his council.

SECOND LORD.
Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a great deal of his act.

FIRST LORD.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his house. Her pretence
is a pilgrimage to Saint Jaques le Grand; which holy undertaking with
most austere sanctimony she accomplished; and there residing, the
tenderness of her nature became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a
groan of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.

SECOND LORD.
How is this justified?

FIRST LORD.
The stronger part of it by her own letters, which makes her story true,
even to the point of her death. Her death itself, which could not be
her office to say is come, was faithfully confirmd by the rector of
the place.

SECOND LORD.
Hath the count all this intelligence?

FIRST LORD.
Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from point, to the full
arming of the verity.

SECOND LORD.
I am heartily sorry that hell be glad of this.

FIRST LORD.
How mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!

SECOND LORD.
And how mightily some other times we drown our gain in tears! The great
dignity that his valour hath here acquird for him shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample.

FIRST LORD.
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together; our
virtues would be proud if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes
would despair if they were not cherishd by our virtues.

 Enter a Messenger.

How now? Wheres your master?

MESSENGER.
He met the duke in the street, sir; of whom he hath taken a solemn
leave: his lordship will next morning for France. The duke hath offered
him letters of commendations to the king.

SECOND LORD.
They shall be no more than needful there, if they were more than they
can commend.

 Enter Bertram.

FIRST LORD.
They cannot be too sweet for the kings tartness. Heres his lordship
now. How now, my lord, ist not after midnight?

BERTRAM.
I have tonight despatchd sixteen businesses, a months length apiece;
by an abstract of success: I have congied with the duke, done my adieu
with his nearest; buried a wife, mournd for her, writ to my lady
mother I am returning, entertained my convoy, and between these main
parcels of despatch effected many nicer needs: the last was the
greatest, but that I have not ended yet.

SECOND LORD.
If the business be of any difficulty and this morning your departure
hence, it requires haste of your lordship.

BERTRAM.
I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter.
But shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and the Soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module has deceivd me like a
double-meaning prophesier.

SECOND LORD.
Bring him forth.

 [_Exeunt Soldiers._]

Has sat i the stocks all night, poor gallant knave.

BERTRAM.
No matter; his heels have deservd it, in usurping his spurs so long.
How does he carry himself?

FIRST LORD.
I have told your lordship already; the stocks carry him. But to answer
you as you would be understood: he weeps like a wench that had shed her
milk; he hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom he supposes to be a
friar, from the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster
of his setting i the stocks. And what think you he hath confessed?

BERTRAM.
Nothing of me, has he?

SECOND LORD.
His confession is taken, and it shall be read to his face; if your
lordship be int, as I believe you are, you must have the patience to
hear it.

 Enter Soldiers with Parolles.

BERTRAM.
A plague upon him! muffled! he can say nothing of me; hush, hush!

FIRST LORD.
Hoodman comes! _Portotartarossa._

FIRST SOLDIER.
He calls for the tortures. What will you say without em?

PAROLLES.
I will confess what I know without constraint. If ye pinch me like a
pasty I can say no more.

FIRST SOLDIER.
_Bosko chimurcho._

FIRST LORD.
_Boblibindo chicurmurco._

FIRST SOLDIER.
You are a merciful general. Our general bids you answer to what I shall
ask you out of a note.

PAROLLES.
And truly, as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
First demand of him how many horse the duke is strong. What say you
to that?

PAROLLES.
Five or six thousand; but very weak and unserviceable: the troops are
all scattered, and the commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit, and as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Shall I set down your answer so?

PAROLLES.
Do. Ill take the sacrament on t, how and which way you will.

BERTRAM.
Alls one to him. What a past-saving slave is this!

FIRST LORD.
You are deceived, my lord; this is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant
militarist (that was his own phrase), that had the whole theoric of war
in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in the chape of his dagger.

SECOND LORD.
I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword clean, nor believe
he can have everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, thats set down.

PAROLLES.
Five or six thousand horse I saidI will say trueor thereabouts, set
down,for Ill speak truth.

FIRST LORD.
Hes very near the truth in this.

BERTRAM.
But I con him no thanks fort in the nature he delivers it.

PAROLLES.
Poor rogues, I pray you say.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, thats set down.

PAROLLES.
I humbly thank you, sir; a truths a truth, the rogues are marvellous
poor.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Demand of him of what strength they are a-foot. What say you to that?

PAROLLES.
By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell
true. Let me see: Spurio, a hundred and fifty, Sebastian, so many;
Corambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowick, and
Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine own company, Chitopher, Vaumond,
Bentii, two hundred fifty each: so that the muster-file, rotten and
sound, upon my life, amounts not to fifteen thousand poll; half of the
which dare not shake the snow from off their cassocks lest they shake
themselves to pieces.

BERTRAM.
What shall be done to him?

FIRST LORD.
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my condition, and what
credit I have with the duke.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, thats set down. You shall demand of him whether one Captain
Dumaine be i the camp, a Frenchman; what his reputation is with the
duke, what his valour, honesty and expertness in wars; or whether he
thinks it were not possible with well-weighing sums of gold to corrupt
him to a revolt. What say you to this? What do you know of it?

PAROLLES.
I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the intergatories.
Demand them singly.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Do you know this Captain Dumaine?

PAROLLES.
I know him: he was a botchers prentice in Paris, from whence he was
whipped for getting the shrieves fool with child, a dumb innocent that
could not say him nay.

 [_First Lord lifts up his hand in anger._]

BERTRAM.
Nay, by your leave, hold your hands; though I know his brains are
forfeit to the next tile that falls.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well, is this captain in the Duke of Florences camp?

PAROLLES.
Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.

FIRST LORD.
Nay, look not so upon me; we shall hear of your lordship anon.

FIRST SOLDIER.
What is his reputation with the duke?

PAROLLES.
The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of mine, and writ to
me this other day to turn him out o the band. I think I have his
letter in my pocket.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Marry, well search.

PAROLLES.
In good sadness, I do not know; either it is there or it is upon a
file, with the dukes other letters, in my tent.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Here tis; heres a paper; shall I read it to you?

PAROLLES.
I do not know if it be it or no.

BERTRAM.
Our interpreter does it well.

FIRST LORD.
Excellently.

FIRST SOLDIER.
[_Reads._] _Dian, the Counts a fool, and full of gold._

PAROLLES.
That is not the dukes letter, sir; that is an advertisement to a
proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take heed of the allurement of
one Count Rossillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very ruttish.
I pray you, sir, put it up again.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Nay, Ill read it first by your favour.

PAROLLES.
My meaning int, I protest, was very honest in the behalf of the maid;
for I knew the young count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is
a whale to virginity, and devours up all the fry it finds.

BERTRAM.
Damnable both sides rogue!

FIRST SOLDIER.
[_Reads._]
_When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and take it;
After he scores, he never pays the score.
Half won is match well made; match, and well make it;
He neer pays after-debts, take it before.
And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss;
For count of this, the counts a fool, I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine, as he vowd to thee in thine ear,_
                                     PAROLLES.

BERTRAM.
He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme ins forehead.

SECOND LORD.
This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold linguist, and the
armipotent soldier.

BERTRAM.
I could endure anything before but a cat, and now hes a cat to me.

FIRST SOLDIER.
I perceive, sir, by our generals looks we shall be fain to hang you.

PAROLLES.
My life, sir, in any case. Not that I am afraid to die, but that, my
offences being many, I would repent out the remainder of nature. Let me
live, sir, in a dungeon, i the stocks, or anywhere, so I may live.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Well see what may be done, so you confess freely. Therefore, once more
to this Captain Dumaine: you have answerd to his reputation with the
duke, and to his valour. What is his honesty?

PAROLLES.
He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister: for rapes and ravishments
he parallels Nessus. He professes not keeping of oaths; in breaking
them he is stronger than Hercules. He will lie, sir, with such
volubility that you would think truth were a fool: drunkenness is his
best virtue, for he will be swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does
little harm, save to his bedclothes about him; but they know his
conditions and lay him in straw. I have but little more to say, sir, of
his honesty; he has everything that an honest man should not have; what
an honest man should have, he has nothing.

FIRST LORD.
I begin to love him for this.

BERTRAM.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him for me, hes more
and more a cat.

FIRST SOLDIER.
What say you to his expertness in war?

PAROLLES.
Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English tragedians,to belie
him I will not,and more of his soldiership I know not, except in that
country he had the honour to be the officer at a place there called
Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of files. I would do the man
what honour I can, but of this I am not certain.

FIRST LORD.
He hath out-villaind villainy so far that the rarity redeems him.

BERTRAM.
A pox on him! Hes a cat still.

FIRST SOLDIER.
His qualities being at this poor price, I need not to ask you if gold
will corrupt him to revolt.

PAROLLES.
Sir, for a quart decu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation,
the inheritance of it, and cut the entail from all remainders, and a
perpetual succession for it perpetually.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Whats his brother, the other Captain Dumaine?

SECOND LORD.
Why does he ask him of me?

FIRST SOLDIER.
Whats he?

PAROLLES.
Een a crow o the same nest; not altogether so great as the first in
goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He excels his brother for a
coward, yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a
retreat he outruns any lackey; marry, in coming on he has the cramp.

FIRST SOLDIER.
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray the Florentine?

PAROLLES.
Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rossillon.

FIRST SOLDIER.
Ill whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.

PAROLLES.
[_Aside._] Ill no more drumming; a plague of all drums! Only to seem
to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious
young boy the count, have I run into this danger: yet who would have
suspected an ambush where I was taken?

FIRST SOLDIER.
There is no remedy, sir, but you must die. The general says you that
have so traitorously discovered the secrets of your army, and made such
pestiferous reports of men very nobly held, can serve the world for no
honest use; therefore you must die. Come, headsman, off with his head.

PAROLLES.
O Lord! sir, let me live, or let me see my death.

FIRST SOLDIER.
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.

 [_Unmuffling him._]

So, look about you; know you any here?

BERTRAM.
Good morrow, noble captain.

SECOND LORD.
God bless you, Captain Parolles.

FIRST LORD.
God save you, noble captain.

SECOND LORD.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafew? I am for France.

FIRST LORD.
Good Captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana
in behalf of the Count Rossillon? And I were not a very coward Id
compel it of you; but fare you well.

 [_Exeunt Bertram, Lords &c._]

FIRST SOLDIER.
You are undone, captain: all but your scarf; that has a knot ont yet.

PAROLLES.
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?

FIRST SOLDIER.
If you could find out a country where but women were that had received
so much shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare ye well, sir. I
am for France too; we shall speak of you there.

 [_Exeunt._]

PAROLLES.
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great
Twould burst at this. Captain Ill be no more,
But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this; for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and, Parolles live
Safest in shame; being foold, by foolery thrive.
Theres place and means for every man alive.
Ill after them.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. Florence. A room in the Widows house.

 Enter Helena, Widow and Diana.

HELENA.
That you may well perceive I have not wrongd you
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety; fore whose throne tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was I did him a desired office,
Dear almost as his life; which gratitude
Through flinty Tartars bosom would peep forth,
And answer thanks. I duly am informd
His grace is at Marseilles; to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding,
And by the leave of my good lord the king,
Well be before our welcome.

WIDOW.
Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

HELENA.
Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughters dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But, O strange men!
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozend thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night; so lust doth play
With what it loathes, for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter. You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

DIANA.
Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

HELENA.
Yet, I pray you;
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away;
Our waggon is prepard, and time revives us.
Alls well that ends well; still the fines the crown.
Whateer the course, the end is the renown.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Rossillon. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Enter Clown, Countess and Lafew.

LAFEW.
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow there,
whose villanous saffron would have made all the unbakd and doughy
youth of a nation in his colour. Your daughter-in-law had been alive at
this hour, and your son here at home, more advancd by the king than by
that red-taild humble-bee I speak of.

COUNTESS.
I would I had not known him; it was the death of the most virtuous
gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating. If she had
partaken of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I
could not have owed her a more rooted love.

LAFEW.
Twas a good lady, twas a good lady. We may pick a thousand salads ere
we light on such another herb.

CLOWN.
Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the salad, or, rather, the
herb of grace.

LAFEW.
They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose-herbs.

CLOWN.
I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir; I have not much skill in grass.

LAFEW.
Whether dost thou profess thyself,a knave or a fool?

CLOWN.
A fool, sir, at a womans service, and a knave at a mans.

LAFEW.
Your distinction?

CLOWN.
I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his service.

LAFEW.
So you were a knave at his service indeed.

CLOWN.
And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.

LAFEW.
I will subscribe for thee; thou art both knave and fool.

CLOWN.
At your service.

LAFEW.
No, no, no.

CLOWN.
Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a prince as you
are.

LAFEW.
Whos that? a Frenchman?

CLOWN.
Faith, sir, a has an English name; but his phisnomy is more hotter in
France than there.

LAFEW.
What prince is that?

CLOWN.
The black prince, sir; alias the prince of darkness; alias the devil.

LAFEW.
Hold thee, theres my purse. I give thee not this to suggest thee from
thy master thou talkst of; serve him still.

CLOWN.
I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire, and the
master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But sure he is the prince of
the world; let his nobility remain ins court. I am for the house with
the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some
that humble themselves may, but the many will be too chill and tender,
and theyll be for the flowry way that leads to the broad gate and the
great fire.

LAFEW.
Go thy ways, I begin to be a-weary of thee; and I tell thee so before,
because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways; let my horses be
well lookd to, without any tricks.

CLOWN.
If I put any tricks upon em, sir, they shall be jades tricks, which
are their own right by the law of nature.

 [_Exit._]

LAFEW.
A shrewd knave, and an unhappy.

COUNTESS.
So he is. My lord thats gone made himself much sport out of him; by
his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his
sauciness; and indeed he has no pace, but runs where he will.

LAFEW.
I like him well; tis not amiss. And I was about to tell you, since I
heard of the good ladys death, and that my lord your son was upon his
return home, I moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of my
daughter; which, in the minority of them both, his majesty out of a
self-gracious remembrance did first propose. His highness hath promisd
me to do it; and, to stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against
your son, there is no fitter matter. How does your ladyship like it?

COUNTESS.
With very much content, my lord, and I wish it happily effected.

LAFEW.
His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able body as when he
numberd thirty; he will be here tomorrow, or I am deceived by him that
in such intelligence hath seldom faild.

COUNTESS.
It rejoices me that I hope I shall see him ere I die. I have letters
that my son will be here tonight. I shall beseech your lordship to
remain with me till they meet together.

LAFEW.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted.

COUNTESS.
You need but plead your honourable privilege.

LAFEW.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter; but, I thank my God, it holds
yet.

 Enter Clown.

CLOWN.
O madam, yonders my lord your son with a patch of velvet ons face;
whether there be a scar undert or no, the velvet knows; but tis a
goodly patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a
half, but his right cheek is worn bare.

LAFEW.
A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery of honour; so
belike is that.

CLOWN.
But it is your carbonadod face.

LAFEW.
Let us go see your son, I pray you. I long to talk with the young noble
soldier.

CLOWN.
Faith, theres a dozen of em, with delicate fine hats, and most
courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every man.

 [_Exeunt._]


ACT V.

SCENE I. Marseilles. A street.

 Enter Helena, Widow and Diana with two Attendants.

HELENA.
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you. In happy time;

 Enter a Gentleman.

This man may help me to his majestys ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you, sir.

GENTLEMAN.
And you.

HELENA.
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

GENTLEMAN.
I have been sometimes there.

HELENA.
I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness;
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

GENTLEMAN.
Whats your will?

HELENA.
That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the king,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

GENTLEMAN.
The kings not here.

HELENA.
Not here, sir?

GENTLEMAN.
Not indeed.
He hence removd last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.

WIDOW.
Lord, how we lose our pains!

HELENA.
Alls well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

GENTLEMAN.
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillon;
Whither I am going.

HELENA.
I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the king before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame,
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

GENTLEMAN.
This Ill do for you.

HELENA.
And you shall find yourself to be well thankd,
Whateer falls more. We must to horse again.
Go, go, provide.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Rossillon. The inner court of the Countesss palace.

 Enter Clown and Parolles.

PAROLLES.
Good Monsieur Lavache, give my Lord Lafew this letter; I have ere now,
sir, been better known to you, when I have held familiarity with
fresher clothes; but I am now, sir, muddied in Fortunes mood, and
smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.

CLOWN.
Truly, Fortunes displeasure is but sluttish, if it smell so strongly
as thou speakst of. I will henceforth eat no fish of Fortunes
buttering. Prythee, allow the wind.

PAROLLES.
Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir. I spake but by a metaphor.

CLOWN.
Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my nose, or against
any mans metaphor. Prythee, get thee further.

PAROLLES.
Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

CLOWN.
Foh, prythee stand away. A paper from Fortunes close-stool to give to
a nobleman! Look here he comes himself.

 Enter Lafew.

Here is a pur of Fortunes, sir, or of Fortunes cat, but not a
musk-cat, that has fallen into the unclean fishpond of her displeasure,
and as he says, is muddied withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp as you
may, for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish, rascally
knave. I do pity his distress in my similes of comfort, and leave him
to your lordship.

 [_Exit._]

PAROLLES.
My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath cruelly scratchd.

LAFEW.
And what would you have me to do? Tis too late to pare her nails now.
Wherein have you played the knave with Fortune that she should scratch
you, who of herself is a good lady, and would not have knaves thrive
long under her? Theres a quart decu for you. Let the justices make
you and Fortune friends; I am for other business.

PAROLLES.
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word.

LAFEW.
You beg a single penny more. Come, you shall hat; save your word.

PAROLLES.
My name, my good lord, is Parolles.

LAFEW.
You beg more than word then. Cox my passion! Give me your hand. How
does your drum?

PAROLLES.
O my good lord, you were the first that found me.

LAFEW.
Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost thee.

PAROLLES.
It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, for you did bring
me out.

LAFEW.
Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once both the office of
God and the devil? One brings the in grace, and the other brings thee
out.

 [_Trumpets sound._]

The kings coming; I know by his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further
after me. I had talk of you last night; though you are a fool and a
knave, you shall eat. Go to; follow.

PAROLLES.
I praise God for you.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same. A room in the Countesss palace.

 Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafew, Lords, Gentlemen, Guards &c.

KING.
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it; but your son,
As mad in folly, lackd the sense to know
Her estimation home.

COUNTESS.
Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done i the blaze of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reasons force,
Oerbears it and burns on.

KING.
My honourd lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watchd the time to shoot.

LAFEW.
This I must say,
But first, I beg my pardon,the young lord
Did to his majesty, his mother, and his lady,
Offence of mighty note; but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes; whose words all ears took captive;
Whose dear perfection hearts that scornd to serve
Humbly calld mistress.

KING.
Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither;
We are reconcild, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon;
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper than oblivion do we bury
Th incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So tis our will he should.

GENTLEMAN.
I shall, my liege.

 [_Exit Gentleman._]

KING.
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?

LAFEW.
All that he is hath reference to your highness.

KING.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.

 Enter Bertram.

LAFEW.
He looks well on t.

KING.
I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way; so stand thou forth;
The time is fair again.

BERTRAM.
My high-repented blames
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

KING.
All is whole.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Lets take the instant by the forward top;
For we are old, and on our quickst decrees
Thinaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?

BERTRAM.
Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold herald of my tongue:
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warpd the line of every other favour,
Scornd a fair colour, or expressd it stolen,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men praisd, and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have lovd, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

KING.
Well excusd:
That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away
From the great compt: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offence,
Crying, Thats good thats gone. Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust:
Our own love waking cries to see whats done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helens knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here well stay
To see our widowers second marriage-day.

COUNTESS.
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless!
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

LAFEW.
Come on, my son, in whom my houses name
Must be digested; give a favour from you,
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.

 [_Bertram gives a ring to Lafew._]

By my old beard,
And evry hair thats on t, Helen thats dead
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that eer I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger.

BERTRAM.
Hers it was not.

KING.
Now, pray you, let me see it; for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastend to it.
This ring was mine; and when I gave it Helen
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft to reave her
Of what should stead her most?

BERTRAM.
My gracious sovereign,
Howeer it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

COUNTESS.
Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it; and she reckond it
At her lifes rate.

LAFEW.
I am sure I saw her wear it.

BERTRAM.
You are deceivd, my lord; she never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrappd in a paper, which containd the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood engagd; but when I had subscribd
To mine own fortune, and informd her fully
I could not answer in that course of honour
As she had made the overture, she ceasd,
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the ring again.

KING.
Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine,
Hath not in natures mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. Twas mine, twas Helens,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess twas hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She calld the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

BERTRAM.
She never saw it.

KING.
Thou speakst it falsely, as I love mine honour,
And makst conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman,twill not prove so:
And yet I know not, thou didst hate her deadly.
And she is dead; which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe
More than to see this ring. Take him away.

 [_Guards seize Bertram._]

My fore-past proofs, howeer the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feard too little. Away with him.
Well sift this matter further.

BERTRAM.
If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where she yet never was.

 [_Exit, guarded._]

KING.
I am wrappd in dismal thinkings.

 Enter a Gentleman.

GENTLEMAN.
Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not:
Heres a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquishd thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this, I know,
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your highness with herself.

KING.
[_Reads._] _Upon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was
dead, I blush to say it, he won me. Now is the Count Rossillon a
widower; his vows are forfeited to me, and my honours paid to him. He
stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow him to his country
for justice. Grant it me, O king, in you it best lies; otherwise a
seducer flourishes, and a poor maid is undone._
                                    DIANA CAPILET.

LAFEW.
I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this. Ill none of
him.

KING.
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the count.

 [_Exeunt Gentleman and some Attendants._]

I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatchd.

COUNTESS.
Now, justice on the doers!

 Enter Bertram, guarded.

KING.
I wonder, sir, since wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry. What womans that?

 Enter Widow and Diana.

DIANA.
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet;
My suit, as I do understand, you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

WIDOW.
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.

KING.
Come hither, count; do you know these women?

BERTRAM.
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?

DIANA.
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?

BERTRAM.
Shes none of mine, my lord.

DIANA.
If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine,
You give away heavens vows, and those are mine,
You give away myself, which is known mine;
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.

LAFEW.
[_To Bertram_] Your reputation comes too short for my daughter; you are
no husband for her.

BERTRAM.
My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature
Whom sometime I have laughd with. Let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour
Than for to think that I would sink it here.

KING.
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them; fairer prove your honour
Than in my thought it lies!

DIANA.
Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if he does think
He had not my virginity.

KING.
What sayst thou to her?

BERTRAM.
Shes impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.

DIANA.
He does me wrong, my lord; if I were so
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel; yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o the camp,
If I be one.

COUNTESS.
He blushes, and tis it.
Of six preceding ancestors, that gem
Conferrd by testament to th sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife;
That rings a thousand proofs.

KING.
Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.

DIANA.
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument; his names Parolles.

LAFEW.
I saw the man today, if man he be.

KING.
Find him, and bring him hither.

 [_Exit an Attendant._]

BERTRAM.
What of him?
Hes quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o the world taxd and debauchd:
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what hell utter,
That will speak anything?

KING.
She hath that ring of yours.

BERTRAM.
I think she has. Certain it is I likd her
And boarded her i the wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancys course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine,
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace,
Subdud me to her rate; she got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market-price have bought.

DIANA.
I must be patient.
You that have turnd off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet,
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband
Send for your ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

BERTRAM.
I have it not.

KING.
What ring was yours, I pray you?

DIANA.
Sir, much like
The same upon your finger.

KING.
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

DIANA.
And this was it I gave him, being abed.

KING.
The story then goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement.

DIANA.
I have spoke the truth.

 Enter Attendant with Parolles.

BERTRAM.
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.

KING.
You boggle shrewdly; every feather starts you.
Is this the man you speak of?

DIANA.
Ay, my lord.

KING.
Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which on your just proceeding, Ill keep off,
By him and by this woman here what know you?

PAROLLES.
So please your majesty, my master hath been an honourable gentleman.
Tricks he hath had in him, which gentlemen have.

KING.
Come, come, to the purpose. Did he love this woman?

PAROLLES.
Faith, sir, he did love her; but how?

KING.
How, I pray you?

PAROLLES.
He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.

KING.
How is that?

PAROLLES.
He lovd her, sir, and lovd her not.

KING.
As thou art a knave and no knave.
What an equivocal companion is this!

PAROLLES.
I am a poor man, and at your majestys command.

LAFEW.
Hes a good drum, my lord, but a naughty orator.

DIANA.
Do you know he promised me marriage?

PAROLLES.
Faith, I know more than Ill speak.

KING.
But wilt thou not speak all thou knowst?

PAROLLES.
Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between them as I said; but more
than that, he loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and talked of
Satan, and of Limbo, and of furies, and I know not what: yet I was in
that credit with them at that time that I knew of their going to bed;
and of other motions, as promising her marriage, and things which would
derive me ill will to speak of; therefore I will not speak what I know.

KING.
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they are married;
but thou art too fine in thy evidence; therefore stand aside. This
ring, you say, was yours?

DIANA.
Ay, my good lord.

KING.
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?

DIANA.
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

KING.
Who lent it you?

DIANA.
It was not lent me neither.

KING.
Where did you find it then?

DIANA.
I found it not.

KING.
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

DIANA.
I never gave it him.

LAFEW.
This womans an easy glove, my lord; she goes off and on at pleasure.

KING.
This ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.

DIANA.
It might be yours or hers for ought I know.

KING.
Take her away, I do not like her now.
To prison with her. And away with him.
Unless thou tellst me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.

DIANA.
Ill never tell you.

KING.
Take her away.

DIANA.
Ill put in bail, my liege.

KING.
I think thee now some common customer.

DIANA.
By Jove, if ever I knew man, twas you.

KING.
Wherefore hast thou accusd him all this while?

DIANA.
Because hes guilty, and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and hell swear tot:
Ill swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great King, I am no strumpet, by my life;
I am either maid, or else this old mans wife.

 [_Pointing to Lafew._]

KING.
She does abuse our ears; to prison with her.

DIANA.
Good mother, fetch my bail. Stay, royal sir;

 [_Exit Widow._]

The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abusd me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmd me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defild;
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick;
So theres my riddle: one thats dead is quick,
And now behold the meaning.

 Enter Widow with Helena.

KING.
Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Ist real that I see?

HELENA.
No, my good lord;
Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name, and not the thing.

BERTRAM.
Both, both. O, pardon!

HELENA.
O, my good lord, when I was like this maid;
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
And, look you, heres your letter. This it says,
When from my finger you can get this ring,
And is by me with child, &c. This is done;
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

BERTRAM.
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
Ill love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

HELENA.
If it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you!
O my dear mother, do I see you living?

LAFEW.
Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon.
[_to Parolles_] Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home, Ill make sport with thee.
Let thy courtesies alone, they are scurvy ones.

KING.
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
[_To Diana._] If thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and Ill pay thy dower;
For I can guess that by thy honest aid,
Thou keptst a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.

 [_Flourish._]

[EPILOGUE]

_The kings a beggar, now the play is done;
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content; which we will pay
With strife to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts;
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts._

 [_Exeunt omnes._]


THE TRAGEDY OF ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  MARK ANTONY,         Triumvirs
  OCTAVIUS CAESAR,         "
  M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS,     "
  SEXTUS POMPEIUS,         "
  DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, friend to Antony
  VENTIDIUS,             "    "   "
  EROS,                  "    "   "
  SCARUS,                "    "   "
  DERCETAS,              "    "   "
  DEMETRIUS,             "    "   "
  PHILO,                 "    "   "
  MAECENAS,   friend to Caesar
  AGRIPPA,       "    "   "
  DOLABELLA,     "    "   "
  PROCULEIUS,    "    "   "
  THYREUS,       "    "   "
  GALLUS,        "    "   "
  MENAS,      friend to Pompey
  MENECRATES,    "    "    "
  VARRIUS,       "    "    "
  TAURUS, Lieutenant-General to Caesar
  CANIDIUS, Lieutenant-General to Antony
  SILIUS, an Officer in Ventidius's army
  EUPHRONIUS, an Ambassador from Antony to Caesar
  ALEXAS,   attendant on Cleopatra
  MARDIAN,      "     "      "
  SELEUCUS,     "     "      "
  DIOMEDES,     "     "      "
  A SOOTHSAYER
  A CLOWN

  CLEOPATRA, Queen of Egypt
  OCTAVIA, sister to Caesar and wife to Antony
  CHARMIAN, lady attending on Cleopatra
  IRAS,       "      "      "     "

  Officers, Soldiers, Messengers, and Attendants

SCENE: The Roman Empire

ACT I. SCENE I. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter DEMETRIUS and PHILO

  PHILO. Nay, but this dotage of our general's
    O'erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes,
    That o'er the files and musters of the war
    Have glow'd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn,
    The office and devotion of their view
    Upon a tawny front. His captain's heart,
    Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
    The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
    And is become the bellows and the fan
    To cool a gipsy's lust.

     Flourish. Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her LADIES, the train,
                    with eunuchs fanning her

    Look where they come!
    Take but good note, and you shall see in him
    The triple pillar of the world transform'd
    Into a strumpet's fool. Behold and see.
  CLEOPATRA. If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
  ANTONY. There's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd.
  CLEOPATRA. I'll set a bourn how far to be belov'd.
  ANTONY. Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.

                       Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. News, my good lord, from Rome.
  ANTONY. Grates me the sum.
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, hear them, Antony.
    Fulvia perchance is angry; or who knows
    If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
    His pow'rful mandate to you: 'Do this or this;
    Take in that kingdom and enfranchise that;
    Perform't, or else we damn thee.'
  ANTONY. How, my love?
  CLEOPATRA. Perchance? Nay, and most like,
    You must not stay here longer; your dismission
    Is come from Caesar; therefore hear it, Antony.
    Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's I would say? Both?
    Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's Queen,
    Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
    Is Caesar's homager. Else so thy cheek pays shame
    When shrill-tongu'd Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
  ANTONY. Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
    Of the rang'd empire fall! Here is my space.
    Kingdoms are clay; our dungy earth alike
    Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life
    Is to do thus [emhracing], when such a mutual pair
    And such a twain can do't, in which I bind,
    On pain of punishment, the world to weet
    We stand up peerless.
  CLEOPATRA. Excellent falsehood!
    Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her?
    I'll seem the fool I am not. Antony
    Will be himself.
  ANTONY. But stirr'd by Cleopatra.
    Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
    Let's not confound the time with conference harsh;
    There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
    Without some pleasure now. What sport to-night?
  CLEOPATRA. Hear the ambassadors.
  ANTONY. Fie, wrangling queen!
    Whom everything becomes- to chide, to laugh,
    To weep; whose every passion fully strives
    To make itself in thee fair and admir'd.
    No messenger but thine, and all alone
    To-night we'll wander through the streets and note
    The qualities of people. Come, my queen;
    Last night you did desire it. Speak not to us.
                     Exeunt ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, with the train
  DEMETRIUS. Is Caesar with Antonius priz'd so slight?
  PHILO. Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony,
    He comes too short of that great property
    Which still should go with Antony.
  DEMETRIUS. I am full sorry
    That he approves the common liar, who
    Thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope
    Of better deeds to-morrow. Rest you happy!            Exeunt

SCENE II. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, and a SOOTHSAYER

  CHARMIAN. Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost
    most absolute Alexas, where's the soothsayer that you prais'd so
    to th' Queen? O that I knew this husband, which you say must
    charge his horns with garlands!
  ALEXAS. Soothsayer!
  SOOTHSAYER. Your will?
  CHARMIAN. Is this the man? Is't you, sir, that know things?
  SOOTHSAYER. In nature's infinite book of secrecy
    A little I can read.
  ALEXAS. Show him your hand.

                       Enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS. Bring in the banquet quickly; wine enough
    Cleopatra's health to drink.
  CHARMIAN. Good, sir, give me good fortune.
  SOOTHSAYER. I make not, but foresee.
  CHARMIAN. Pray, then, foresee me one.
  SOOTHSAYER. You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
  CHARMIAN. He means in flesh.
  IRAS. No, you shall paint when you are old.
  CHARMIAN. Wrinkles forbid!
  ALEXAS. Vex not his prescience; be attentive.
  CHARMIAN. Hush!
  SOOTHSAYER. You shall be more beloving than beloved.
  CHARMIAN. I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
  ALEXAS. Nay, hear him.
  CHARMIAN. Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married to
    three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all. Let me have a
    child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry may do homage. Find me to
    marry me with Octavius Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
  SOOTHSAYER. You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
  CHARMIAN. O, excellent! I love long life better than figs.
  SOOTHSAYER. You have seen and prov'd a fairer former fortune
    Than that which is to approach.
  CHARMIAN. Then belike my children shall have no names.
    Prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
  SOOTHSAYER. If every of your wishes had a womb,
    And fertile every wish, a million.
  CHARMIAN. Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
  ALEXAS. You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
  CHARMIAN. Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
  ALEXAS. We'll know all our fortunes.
  ENOBARBUS. Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall be-
    drunk to bed.
  IRAS. There's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
  CHARMIAN. E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine.
  IRAS. Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
  CHARMIAN. Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, I
    cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee, tell her but worky-day fortune.
  SOOTHSAYER. Your fortunes are alike.
  IRAS. But how, but how? Give me particulars.
  SOOTHSAYER. I have said.
  IRAS. Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
  CHARMIAN. Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I,
    where would you choose it?
  IRAS. Not in my husband's nose.
  CHARMIAN. Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas- come, his
    fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman that cannot go,
    sweet Isis, I beseech thee! And let her die too, and give him a
    worse! And let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow
    him laughing to his grave, fiftyfold a cuckold! Good Isis, hear
    me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight; good
    Isis, I beseech thee!
  IRAS. Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as
    it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wiv'd, so it is
    a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore,
    dear Isis, keep decorum, and fortune him accordingly!
  CHARMIAN. Amen.
  ALEXAS. Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they
    would make themselves whores but they'ld do't!

                          Enter CLEOPATRA

  ENOBARBUS. Hush! Here comes Antony.
  CHARMIAN. Not he; the Queen.
  CLEOPATRA. Saw you my lord?
  ENOBARBUS. No, lady.
  CLEOPATRA. Was he not here?
  CHARMIAN. No, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. He was dispos'd to mirth; but on the sudden
    A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!
  ENOBARBUS. Madam?
  CLEOPATRA. Seek him, and bring him hither. Where's Alexas?
  ALEXAS. Here, at your service. My lord approaches.

          Enter ANTONY, with a MESSENGER and attendants

  CLEOPATRA. We will not look upon him. Go with us.
                       Exeunt CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, and the rest
  MESSENGER. Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
  ANTONY. Against my brother Lucius?
  MESSENGER. Ay.
    But soon that war had end, and the time's state
    Made friends of them, jointing their force 'gainst Caesar,
    Whose better issue in the war from Italy
    Upon the first encounter drave them.
  ANTONY. Well, what worst?
  MESSENGER. The nature of bad news infects the teller.
  ANTONY. When it concerns the fool or coward. On!
    Things that are past are done with me. 'Tis thus:
    Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
    I hear him as he flatter'd.
  MESSENGER. Labienus-
    This is stiff news- hath with his Parthian force
    Extended Asia from Euphrates,
    His conquering banner shook from Syria
    To Lydia and to Ionia,
    Whilst-
  ANTONY. Antony, thou wouldst say.
  MESSENGER. O, my lord!
  ANTONY. Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue;
    Name Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome.
    Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
    With such full licence as both truth and malice
    Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
    When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us
    Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
  MESSENGER. At your noble pleasure.                        Exit
  ANTONY. From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there!
  FIRST ATTENDANT. The man from Sicyon- is there such an one?
  SECOND ATTENDANT. He stays upon your will.
  ANTONY. Let him appear.
    These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
    Or lose myself in dotage.

                 Enter another MESSENGER with a letter

    What are you?
  SECOND MESSENGER. Fulvia thy wife is dead.
  ANTONY. Where died she?
  SECOND MESSENGER. In Sicyon.
    Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
    Importeth thee to know, this bears.       [Gives the letter]
  ANTONY. Forbear me.                             Exit MESSENGER
    There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.
    What our contempts doth often hurl from us
    We wish it ours again; the present pleasure,
    By revolution low'ring, does become
    The opposite of itself. She's good, being gone;
    The hand could pluck her back that shov'd her on.
    I must from this enchanting queen break off.
    Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
    My idleness doth hatch. How now, Enobarbus!

                    Re-enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS. What's your pleasure, sir?
  ANTONY. I must with haste from hence.
  ENOBARBUS. Why, then we kill all our women. We see how mortal an
    unkindness is to them; if they suffer our departure, death's the
    word.
  ANTONY. I must be gone.
  ENOBARBUS. Under a compelling occasion, let women die. It were pity
    to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great
    cause they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but
    the least noise of this, dies instantly; I have seen her die
    twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do think there is mettle
    in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a
    celerity in dying.
  ANTONY. She is cunning past man's thought.
  ENOBARBUS. Alack, sir, no! Her passions are made of nothing but the
    finest part of pure love. We cannot call her winds and waters
    sighs and tears; they are greater storms and tempests than
    almanacs can report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she
    makes a show'r of rain as well as Jove.
  ANTONY. Would I had never seen her!
  ENOBARBUS. O Sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of
    work, which not to have been blest withal would have discredited
    your travel.
  ANTONY. Fulvia is dead.
  ENOBARBUS. Sir?
  ANTONY. Fulvia is dead.
  ENOBARBUS. Fulvia?
  ANTONY. Dead.
  ENOBARBUS. Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it
    pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it
    shows to man the tailors of the earth; comforting therein that
    when old robes are worn out there are members to make new. If
    there were no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
    and the case to be lamented. This grief is crown'd with
    consolation: your old smock brings forth a new petticoat; and
    indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.
  ANTONY. The business she hath broached in the state
    Cannot endure my absence.
  ENOBARBUS. And the business you have broach'd here cannot be
    without you; especially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends
    on your abode.
  ANTONY. No more light answers. Let our officers
    Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
    The cause of our expedience to the Queen,
    And get her leave to part. For not alone
    The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
    Do strongly speak to us; but the letters to
    Of many our contriving friends in Rome
    Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
    Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
    The empire of the sea; our slippery people,
    Whose love is never link'd to the deserver
    Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
    Pompey the Great and all his dignities
    Upon his son; who, high in name and power,
    Higher than both in blood and life, stands up
    For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
    The sides o' th' world may danger. Much is breeding
    Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life
    And not a serpent's poison. Say our pleasure,
    To such whose place is under us, requires
    Our quick remove from hence.
  ENOBARBUS. I shall do't.                                Exeunt

SCENE III. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS

  CLEOPATRA. Where is he?
  CHARMIAN. I did not see him since.
  CLEOPATRA. See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
    I did not send you. If you find him sad,
    Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
    That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.        Exit ALEXAS
  CHARMIAN. Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
    You do not hold the method to enforce
    The like from him.
  CLEOPATRA. What should I do I do not?
  CHARMIAN. In each thing give him way; cross him in nothing.
  CLEOPATRA. Thou teachest like a fool- the way to lose him.
  CHARMIAN. Tempt him not so too far; I wish, forbear;
    In time we hate that which we often fear.

                            Enter ANTONY

    But here comes Antony.
  CLEOPATRA. I am sick and sullen.
  ANTONY. I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose-
  CLEOPATRA. Help me away, dear Charmian; I shall fall.
    It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
    Will not sustain it.
  ANTONY. Now, my dearest queen-
  CLEOPATRA. Pray you, stand farther from me.
  ANTONY. What's the matter?
  CLEOPATRA. I know by that same eye there's some good news.
    What says the married woman? You may go.
    Would she had never given you leave to come!
    Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here-
    I have no power upon you; hers you are.
  ANTONY. The gods best know-
  CLEOPATRA. O, never was there queen
    So mightily betray'd! Yet at the first
    I saw the treasons planted.
  ANTONY. Cleopatra-
  CLEOPATRA. Why should I think you can be mine and true,
    Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
    Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
    To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
    Which break themselves in swearing!
  ANTONY. Most sweet queen-
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, pray you seek no colour for your going,
    But bid farewell, and go. When you sued staying,
    Then was the time for words. No going then!
    Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
    Bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor
    But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
    Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
    Art turn'd the greatest liar.
  ANTONY. How now, lady!
  CLEOPATRA. I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst know
    There were a heart in Egypt.
  ANTONY. Hear me, queen:
    The strong necessity of time commands
    Our services awhile; but my full heart
    Remains in use with you. Our Italy
    Shines o'er with civil swords: Sextus Pompeius
    Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
    Equality of two domestic powers
    Breed scrupulous faction; the hated, grown to strength,
    Are newly grown to love. The condemn'd Pompey,
    Rich in his father's honour, creeps apace
    Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
    Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
    And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
    By any desperate change. My more particular,
    And that which most with you should safe my going,
    Is Fulvia's death.
  CLEOPATRA. Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
     It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?
  ANTONY. She's dead, my Queen.
    Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
    The garboils she awak'd. At the last, best.
    See when and where she died.
  CLEOPATRA. O most false love!
    Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
    With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
    In Fulvia's death how mine receiv'd shall be.
  ANTONY. Quarrel no more, but be prepar'd to know
    The purposes I bear; which are, or cease,
    As you shall give th' advice. By the fire
    That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
    Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war
    As thou affects.
  CLEOPATRA. Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
    But let it be; I am quickly ill and well-
    So Antony loves.
  ANTONY. My precious queen, forbear,
    And give true evidence to his love, which stands
    An honourable trial.
  CLEOPATRA. So Fulvia told me.
    I prithee turn aside and weep for her;
    Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
    Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
    Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
    Like perfect honour.
  ANTONY. You'll heat my blood; no more.
  CLEOPATRA. You can do better yet; but this is meetly.
  ANTONY. Now, by my sword-
  CLEOPATRA. And target. Still he mends;
    But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
    How this Herculean Roman does become
    The carriage of his chafe.
  ANTONY. I'll leave you, lady.
  CLEOPATRA. Courteous lord, one word.
    Sir, you and I must part- but that's not it.
    Sir, you and I have lov'd- but there's not it.
    That you know well. Something it is I would-
    O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
    And I am all forgotten!
  ANTONY. But that your royalty
    Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
    For idleness itself.
  CLEOPATRA. 'Tis sweating labour
    To bear such idleness so near the heart
    As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me;
    Since my becomings kill me when they do not
    Eye well to you. Your honour calls you hence;
    Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
    And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword
    Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
    Be strew'd before your feet!
  ANTONY. Let us go. Come.
    Our separation so abides and flies
    That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
    And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
    Away!                                                 Exeunt

SCENE IV. Rome. CAESAR'S house

Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, reading a letter; LEPIDUS, and their train

  CAESAR. You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
    It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
    Our great competitor. From Alexandria
    This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
    The lamps of night in revel; is not more manlike
    Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
    More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
    Vouchsaf'd to think he had partners. You shall find there
    A man who is the abstract of all faults
    That all men follow.
  LEPIDUS. I must not think there are
    Evils enow to darken all his goodness.
    His faults, in him, seem as the spots of heaven,
    More fiery by night's blackness; hereditary
    Rather than purchas'd; what he cannot change
    Than what he chooses.
  CAESAR. You are too indulgent. Let's grant it is not
    Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
    To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
    And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
    To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
    With knaves that smell of sweat. Say this becomes him-
    As his composure must be rare indeed
    Whom these things cannot blemish- yet must Antony
    No way excuse his foils when we do bear
    So great weight in his lightness. If he fill'd
    His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
    Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
    Call on him for't! But to confound such time
    That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud
    As his own state and ours- 'tis to be chid
    As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,
    Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
    And so rebel to judgment.

                   Enter a MESSENGER

  LEPIDUS. Here's more news.
  MESSENGER. Thy biddings have been done; and every hour,
    Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
    How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
    And it appears he is belov'd of those
    That only have fear'd Caesar. To the ports
    The discontents repair, and men's reports
    Give him much wrong'd.
  CAESAR. I should have known no less.
    It hath been taught us from the primal state
    That he which is was wish'd until he were;
    And the ebb'd man, ne'er lov'd till ne'er worth love,
    Comes dear'd by being lack'd. This common body,
    Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
    Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
    To rot itself with motion.
  MESSENGER. Caesar, I bring thee word
    Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
    Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
    With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
    They make in Italy; the borders maritime
    Lack blood to think on't, and flush youth revolt.
    No vessel can peep forth but 'tis as soon
    Taken as seen; for Pompey's name strikes more
    Than could his war resisted.
  CAESAR. Antony,
    Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
    Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
    Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
    Did famine follow; whom thou fought'st against,
    Though daintily brought up, with patience more
    Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink
    The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
    Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign
    The roughest berry on the rudest hedge;
    Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
    The barks of trees thou brows'd. On the Alps
    It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh,
    Which some did die to look on. And all this-
    It wounds thine honour that I speak it now-
    Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
    So much as lank'd not.
  LEPIDUS. 'Tis pity of him.
  CAESAR. Let his shames quickly
    Drive him to Rome. 'Tis time we twain
    Did show ourselves i' th' field; and to that end
    Assemble we immediate council. Pompey
    Thrives in our idleness.
  LEPIDUS. To-morrow, Caesar,
    I shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly
    Both what by sea and land I can be able
    To front this present time.
  CAESAR. Till which encounter
    It is my business too. Farewell.
  LEPIDUS. Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime
    Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
    To let me be partaker.
  CAESAR. Doubt not, sir;
    I knew it for my bond.                                Exeunt

SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN

  CLEOPATRA. Charmian!
  CHARMIAN. Madam?
  CLEOPATRA. Ha, ha!
    Give me to drink mandragora.
  CHARMIAN. Why, madam?
  CLEOPATRA. That I might sleep out this great gap of time
    My Antony is away.
  CHARMIAN. You think of him too much.
  CLEOPATRA. O, 'tis treason!
  CHARMIAN. Madam, I trust, not so.
  CLEOPATRA. Thou, eunuch Mardian!
  MARDIAN. What's your Highness' pleasure?
  CLEOPATRA. Not now to hear thee sing; I take no pleasure
    In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
    That, being unseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
    May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
  MARDIAN. Yes, gracious madam.
  CLEOPATRA. Indeed?
  MARDIAN. Not in deed, madam; for I can do nothing
    But what indeed is honest to be done.
    Yet have I fierce affections, and think
    What Venus did with Mars.
  CLEOPATRA. O Charmian,
    Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he or sits he?
    Or does he walk? or is he on his horse?
    O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
    Do bravely, horse; for wot'st thou whom thou mov'st?
    The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
    And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
    Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?'
    For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
    With most delicious poison. Think on me,
    That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
    And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
    When thou wast here above the ground, I was
    A morsel for a monarch; and great Pompey
    Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
    There would he anchor his aspect and die
    With looking on his life.

                         Enter ALEXAS

  ALEXAS. Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
  CLEOPATRA. How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
    Yet, coming from him, that great med'cine hath
    With his tinct gilded thee.
    How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
  ALEXAS. Last thing he did, dear Queen,
    He kiss'd- the last of many doubled kisses-
    This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
  CLEOPATRA. Mine ear must pluck it thence.
  ALEXAS. 'Good friend,' quoth he
    'Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
    This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
    To mend the petty present, I will piece
    Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East,
    Say thou, shall call her mistress.' So he nodded,
    And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
    Who neigh'd so high that what I would have spoke
    Was beastly dumb'd by him.
  CLEOPATRA. What, was he sad or merry?
  ALEXAS. Like to the time o' th' year between the extremes
    Of hot and cold; he was nor sad nor merry.
  CLEOPATRA. O well-divided disposition! Note him,
    Note him, good Charmian; 'tis the man; but note him!
    He was not sad, for he would shine on those
    That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
    Which seem'd to tell them his remembrance lay
    In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
    O heavenly mingle! Be'st thou sad or merry,
    The violence of either thee becomes,
    So does it no man else. Met'st thou my posts?
  ALEXAS. Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
    Why do you send so thick?
  CLEOPATRA. Who's born that day
    When I forget to send to Antony
    Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian.
    Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,
    Ever love Caesar so?
  CHARMIAN. O that brave Caesar!
  CLEOPATRA. Be chok'd with such another emphasis!
    Say 'the brave Antony.'
  CHARMIAN. The valiant Caesar!
  CLEOPATRA. By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
    If thou with Caesar paragon again
    My man of men.
  CHARMIAN. By your most gracious pardon,
    I sing but after you.
  CLEOPATRA. My salad days,
    When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
    To say as I said then. But come, away!
    Get me ink and paper.
    He shall have every day a several greeting,
    Or I'll unpeople Egypt.                               Exeunt

ACT II. SCENE I. Messina. POMPEY'S house

Enter POMPEY, MENECRATES, and MENAS, in warlike manner

  POMPEY. If the great gods be just, they shall assist
    The deeds of justest men.
  MENECRATES. Know, worthy Pompey,
    That what they do delay they not deny.
  POMPEY. Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
    The thing we sue for.
  MENECRATES. We, ignorant of ourselves,
    Beg often our own harms, which the wise pow'rs
    Deny us for our good; so find we profit
    By losing of our prayers.
  POMPEY. I shall do well.
    The people love me, and the sea is mine;
    My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
    Says it will come to th' full. Mark Antony
    In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
    No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
    He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
    Of both is flatter'd; but he neither loves,
    Nor either cares for him.
  MENAS. Caesar and Lepidus
    Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.
  POMPEY. Where have you this? 'Tis false.
  MENAS. From Silvius, sir.
  POMPEY. He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
    Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
    Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wan'd lip!
    Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
    Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
    Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
    Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
    That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
    Even till a Lethe'd dullness-

                       Enter VARRIUS

    How now, Varrius!
  VARRIUS. This is most certain that I shall deliver:
    Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
    Expected. Since he went from Egypt 'tis
    A space for farther travel.
  POMPEY. I could have given less matter
    A better ear. Menas, I did not think
    This amorous surfeiter would have donn'd his helm
    For such a petty war; his soldiership
    Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
    The higher our opinion, that our stirring
    Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
    The ne'er-lust-wearied Antony.
  MENAS. I cannot hope
    Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
    His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar;
    His brother warr'd upon him; although, I think,
    Not mov'd by Antony.
  POMPEY. I know not, Menas,
    How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
    Were't not that we stand up against them all,
    'Twere pregnant they should square between themselves;
    For they have entertained cause enough
    To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
    May cement their divisions, and bind up
    The petty difference we yet not know.
    Be't as our gods will have't! It only stands
    Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
    Come, Menas.                                          Exeunt

SCENE II. Rome. The house of LEPIDUS

Enter ENOBARBUS and LEPIDUS

  LEPIDUS. Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
    And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
    To soft and gentle speech.
  ENOBARBUS. I shall entreat him
    To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
    Let Antony look over Caesar's head
    And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
    Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard,
    I would not shave't to-day.
  LEPIDUS. 'Tis not a time
    For private stomaching.
  ENOBARBUS. Every time
    Serves for the matter that is then born in't.
  LEPIDUS. But small to greater matters must give way.
  ENOBARBUS. Not if the small come first.
  LEPIDUS. Your speech is passion;
    But pray you stir no embers up. Here comes
    The noble Antony.

                Enter ANTONY and VENTIDIUS

  ENOBARBUS. And yonder, Caesar.

            Enter CAESAR, MAECENAS, and AGRIPPA

  ANTONY. If we compose well here, to Parthia.
    Hark, Ventidius.
  CAESAR. I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.
  LEPIDUS. Noble friends,
    That which combin'd us was most great, and let not
    A leaner action rend us. What's amiss,
    May it be gently heard. When we debate
    Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
    Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,
    The rather for I earnestly beseech,
    Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
    Nor curstness grow to th' matter.
  ANTONY. 'Tis spoken well.
    Were we before our arinies, and to fight,
    I should do thus.                                 [Flourish]
  CAESAR. Welcome to Rome.
  ANTONY. Thank you.
  CAESAR. Sit.
  ANTONY. Sit, sir.
  CAESAR. Nay, then.                                  [They sit]
  ANTONY. I learn you take things ill which are not so,
    Or being, concern you not.
  CAESAR. I must be laugh'd at
    If, or for nothing or a little,
    Should say myself offended, and with you
    Chiefly i' the world; more laugh'd at that I should
    Once name you derogately when to sound your name
    It not concern'd me.
  ANTONY. My being in Egypt, Caesar,
    What was't to you?
  CAESAR. No more than my residing here at Rome
    Might be to you in Egypt. Yet, if you there
    Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
    Might be my question.
  ANTONY. How intend you- practis'd?
  CAESAR. You may be pleas'd to catch at mine intent
    By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
    Made wars upon me, and their contestation
    Was theme for you; you were the word of war.
  ANTONY. You do mistake your business; my brother never
    Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it,
    And have my learning from some true reports
    That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
    Discredit my authority with yours,
    And make the wars alike against my stomach,
    Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
    Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
    As matter whole you have not to make it with,
    It must not be with this.
  CAESAR. You praise yourself
    By laying defects of judgment to me; but
    You patch'd up your excuses.
  ANTONY. Not so, not so;
    I know you could not lack, I am certain on't,
    Very necessity of this thought, that I,
    Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
    Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
    Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
    I would you had her spirit in such another!
    The third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle
    You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
  ENOBARBUS. Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to
    wars with the women!
  ANTONY. So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
    Made out of her impatience- which not wanted
    Shrewdness of policy too- I grieving grant
    Did you too much disquiet. For that you must
    But say I could not help it.
  CAESAR. I wrote to you
    When rioting in Alexandria; you
    Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
    Did gibe my missive out of audience.
  ANTONY. Sir,
    He fell upon me ere admitted. Then
    Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
    Of what I was i' th' morning; but next day
    I told him of myself, which was as much
    As to have ask'd him pardon. Let this fellow
    Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
    Out of our question wipe him.
  CAESAR. You have broken
    The article of your oath, which you shall never
    Have tongue to charge me with.
  LEPIDUS. Soft, Caesar!
  ANTONY. No;
    Lepidus, let him speak.
    The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
    Supposing that I lack'd it. But on, Caesar:
    The article of my oath-
  CAESAR. To lend me arms and aid when I requir'd them,
    The which you both denied.
  ANTONY. Neglected, rather;
    And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
    From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may,
    I'll play the penitent to you; but mine honesty
    Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
    Work without it. Truth is, that Fulvia,
    To have me out of Egypt, made wars here;
    For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
    So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
    To stoop in such a case.
  LEPIDUS. 'Tis noble spoken.
  MAECENAS. If it might please you to enforce no further
    The griefs between ye- to forget them quite
    Were to remember that the present need
    Speaks to atone you.
  LEPIDUS. Worthily spoken, Maecenas.
  ENOBARBUS. Or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant,
    you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey, return it again.
    You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to
    do.
  ANTONY. Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.
  ENOBARBUS. That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
  ANTONY. You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.
  ENOBARBUS. Go to, then- your considerate stone!
  CAESAR. I do not much dislike the matter, but
    The manner of his speech; for't cannot be
    We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
    So diff'ring in their acts. Yet if I knew
    What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge
    O' th' world, I would pursue it.
  AGRIPPA. Give me leave, Caesar.
  CAESAR. Speak, Agrippa.
  AGRIPPA. Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
    Admir'd Octavia. Great Mark Antony
    Is now a widower.
  CAESAR. Say not so, Agrippa.
    If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
    Were well deserv'd of rashness.
  ANTONY. I am not married, Caesar. Let me hear
    Agrippa further speak.
  AGRIPPA. To hold you in perpetual amity,
    To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
    With an unslipping knot, take Antony
    Octavia to his wife; whose beauty claims
    No worse a husband than the best of men;
    Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
    That which none else can utter. By this marriage
    All little jealousies, which now seem great,
    And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
    Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
    Where now half tales be truths. Her love to both
    Would each to other, and all loves to both,
    Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke;
    For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
    By duty ruminated.
  ANTONY. Will Caesar speak?
  CAESAR. Not till he hears how Antony is touch'd
    With what is spoke already.
  ANTONY. What power is in Agrippa,
    If I would say 'Agrippa, be it so,'
    To make this good?
  CAESAR. The power of Caesar, and
    His power unto Octavia.
  ANTONY. May I never
    To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
    Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand.
    Further this act of grace; and from this hour
    The heart of brothers govern in our loves
    And sway our great designs!
  CAESAR. There is my hand.
    A sister I bequeath you, whom no brother
    Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
    To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
    Fly off our loves again!
  LEPIDUS. Happily, amen!
  ANTONY. I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey;
    For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
    Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
    Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
    At heel of that, defy him.
  LEPIDUS. Time calls upon's.
    Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
    Or else he seeks out us.
  ANTONY. Where lies he?
  CAESAR. About the Mount Misenum.
  ANTONY. What is his strength by land?
  CAESAR. Great and increasing; but by sea
    He is an absolute master.
  ANTONY. So is the fame.
    Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it.
    Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
    The business we have talk'd of.
  CAESAR. With most gladness;
    And do invite you to my sister's view,
    Whither straight I'll lead you.
  ANTONY. Let us, Lepidus,
    Not lack your company.
  LEPIDUS. Noble Antony,
    Not sickness should detain me.                    [Flourish]
                     Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS, AGRIPPA, MAECENAS
  MAECENAS. Welcome from Egypt, sir.
  ENOBARBUS. Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honourable
    friend, Agrippa!
  AGRIPPA. Good Enobarbus!
  MAECENAS. We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
    digested. You stay'd well by't in Egypt.
  ENOBARBUS. Ay, sir; we did sleep day out of countenance and made
    the night light with drinking.
  MAECENAS. Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and but
    twelve persons there. Is this true?
  ENOBARBUS. This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had much more
    monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
  MAECENAS. She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.
  ENOBARBUS. When she first met Mark Antony she purs'd up his heart,
    upon the river of Cydnus.
  AGRIPPA. There she appear'd indeed! Or my reporter devis'd well for
    her.
  ENOBARBUS. I will tell you.
    The barge she sat in, like a burnish'd throne,
    Burn'd on the water. The poop was beaten gold;
    Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
    The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
    Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
    The water which they beat to follow faster,
    As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
    It beggar'd all description. She did lie
    In her pavilion, cloth-of-gold, of tissue,
    O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
    The fancy out-work nature. On each side her
    Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
    With divers-colour'd fans, whose wind did seem
    To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
    And what they undid did.
  AGRIPPA. O, rare for Antony!
  ENOBARBUS. Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
    So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
    And made their bends adornings. At the helm
    A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle
    Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
    That yarely frame the office. From the barge
    A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
    Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
    Her people out upon her; and Antony,
    Enthron'd i' th' market-place, did sit alone,
    Whistling to th' air; which, but for vacancy,
    Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
    And made a gap in nature.
  AGRIPPA. Rare Egyptian!
  ENOBARBUS. Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
    Invited her to supper. She replied
    It should be better he became her guest;
    Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
    Whom ne'er the word of 'No' woman heard speak,
    Being barber'd ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
    And for his ordinary pays his heart
    For what his eyes eat only.
  AGRIPPA. Royal wench!
    She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed.
    He ploughed her, and she cropp'd.
  ENOBARBUS. I saw her once
    Hop forty paces through the public street;
    And, having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
    That she did make defect perfection,
    And, breathless, pow'r breathe forth.
  MAECENAS. Now Antony must leave her utterly.
  ENOBARBUS. Never! He will not.
    Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
    Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
    The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
    Where most she satisfies; for vilest things
    Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
    Bless her when she is riggish.
  MAECENAS. If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle
    The heart of Antony, Octavia is
    A blessed lottery to him.
  AGRIPPA. Let us go.
    Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
    Whilst you abide here.
  ENOBARBUS. Humbly, sir, I thank you.                    Exeunt

SCENE III. Rome. CAESAR'S house

Enter ANTONY, CAESAR, OCTAVIA between them

  ANTONY. The world and my great office will sometimes
    Divide me from your bosom.
  OCTAVIA. All which time
    Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
    To them for you.
  ANTONY. Good night, sir. My Octavia,
    Read not my blemishes in the world's report.
    I have not kept my square; but that to come
    Shall all be done by th' rule. Good night, dear lady.
  OCTAVIA. Good night, sir.
  CAESAR. Good night.                  Exeunt CAESAR and OCTAVIA

                        Enter SOOTHSAYER

  ANTONY. Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?
  SOOTHSAYER. Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither!
  ANTONY. If you can- your reason.
  SOOTHSAYER. I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue; but
    yet hie you to Egypt again.
  ANTONY. Say to me,
    Whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesar's or mine?
  SOOTHSAYER. Caesar's.
    Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
    Thy daemon, that thy spirit which keeps thee, is
    Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
    Where Caesar's is not; but near him thy angel
    Becomes a fear, as being o'erpow'r'd. Therefore
    Make space enough between you.
  ANTONY. Speak this no more.
  SOOTHSAYER. To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
    If thou dost play with him at any game,
    Thou art sure to lose; and of that natural luck
    He beats thee 'gainst the odds. Thy lustre thickens
    When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit
    Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
    But, he away, 'tis noble.
  ANTONY. Get thee gone.
    Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
                                                 Exit SOOTHSAYER
    He shall to Parthia.- Be it art or hap,
    He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him;
    And in our sports my better cunning faints
    Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds;
    His cocks do win the battle still of mine,
    When it is all to nought, and his quails ever
    Beat mine, inhoop'd, at odds. I will to Egypt;
    And though I make this marriage for my peace,
    I' th' East my pleasure lies.

                       Enter VENTIDIUS

    O, come, Ventidius,
    You must to Parthia. Your commission's ready;
    Follow me and receive't.                              Exeunt

SCENE IV. Rome. A street

Enter LEPIDUS, MAECENAS, and AGRIPPA

  LEPIDUS. Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
    Your generals after.
  AGRIPPA. Sir, Mark Antony
    Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.
  LEPIDUS. Till I shall see you in your soldier's dress,
    Which will become you both, farewell.
  MAECENAS. We shall,
    As I conceive the journey, be at th' Mount
    Before you, Lepidus.
  LEPIDUS. Your way is shorter;
    My purposes do draw me much about.
    You'll win two days upon me.
  BOTH. Sir, good success!
  LEPIDUS. Farewell.                                      Exeunt

SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS

  CLEOPATRA. Give me some music- music, moody food
    Of us that trade in love.
  ALL. The music, ho!

                    Enter MARDIAN the eunuch

  CLEOPATRA. Let it alone! Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.
  CHARMIAN. My arm is sore; best play with Mardian.
  CLEOPATRA. As well a woman with an eunuch play'd
    As with a woman. Come, you'll play with me, sir?
  MARDIAN. As well as I can, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. And when good will is show'd, though't come too short,
    The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now.
    Give me mine angle- we'll to th' river. There,
    My music playing far off, I will betray
    Tawny-finn'd fishes; my bended hook shall pierce
    Their slimy jaws; and as I draw them up
    I'll think them every one an Antony,
    And say 'Ah ha! Y'are caught.'
  CHARMIAN. 'Twas merry when
    You wager'd on your angling; when your diver
    Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
    With fervency drew up.
  CLEOPATRA. That time? O times
    I laughed him out of patience; and that night
    I laugh'd him into patience; and next morn,
    Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
    Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
    I wore his sword Philippan.

                    Enter a MESSENGER

    O! from Italy?
    Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
    That long time have been barren.
  MESSENGER. Madam, madam-
  CLEOPATRA. Antony's dead! If thou say so, villain,
    Thou kill'st thy mistress; but well and free,
    If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
    My bluest veins to kiss- a hand that kings
    Have lipp'd, and trembled kissing.
  MESSENGER. First, madam, he is well.
  CLEOPATRA. Why, there's more gold.
    But, sirrah, mark, we use
    To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
    The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
    Down thy ill-uttering throat.
  MESSENGER. Good madam, hear me.
  CLEOPATRA. Well, go to, I will.
    But there's no goodness in thy face. If Antony
    Be free and healthful- why so tart a favour
    To trumpet such good tidings? If not well,
    Thou shouldst come like a Fury crown'd with snakes,
    Not like a formal man.
  MESSENGER. Will't please you hear me?
  CLEOPATRA. I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.
    Yet, if thou say Antony lives, is well,
    Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
    I'll set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
    Rich pearls upon thee.
  MESSENGER. Madam, he's well.
  CLEOPATRA. Well said.
  MESSENGER. And friends with Caesar.
  CLEOPATRA. Th'art an honest man.
  MESSENGER. Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
  CLEOPATRA. Make thee a fortune from me.
  MESSENGER. But yet, madam-
  CLEOPATRA. I do not like 'but yet.' It does allay
    The good precedence; fie upon 'but yet'!
    'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth
    Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
    Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
    The good and bad together. He's friends with Caesar;
    In state of health, thou say'st; and, thou say'st, free.
  MESSENGER. Free, madam! No; I made no such report.
    He's bound unto Octavia.
  CLEOPATRA. For what good turn?
  MESSENGER. For the best turn i' th' bed.
  CLEOPATRA. I am pale, Charmian.
  MESSENGER. Madam, he's married to Octavia.
  CLEOPATRA. The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
                                              [Strikes him down]
  MESSENGER. Good madam, patience.
  CLEOPATRA. What say you? Hence,                  [Strikes him]
    Horrible villain! or I'll spurn thine eyes
    Like balls before me; I'll unhair thy head;
                                     [She hales him up and down]
    Thou shalt be whipp'd with wire and stew'd in brine,
    Smarting in ling'ring pickle.
  MESSENGER. Gracious madam,
    I that do bring the news made not the match.
  CLEOPATRA. Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee,
    And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
    Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage;
    And I will boot thee with what gift beside
    Thy modesty can beg.
  MESSENGER. He's married, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. Rogue, thou hast liv'd too long.    [Draws a knife]
  MESSENGER. Nay, then I'll run.
    What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.             Exit
  CHARMIAN. Good madam, keep yourself within yourself:
    The man is innocent.
  CLEOPATRA. Some innocents scape not the thunderbolt.
    Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures
    Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
    Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!
  CHARMIAN. He is afear'd to come.
  CLEOPATRA. I will not hurt him.
    These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
    A meaner than myself; since I myself
    Have given myself the cause.

                    Enter the MESSENGER again

    Come hither, sir.
    Though it be honest, it is never good
    To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
    An host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell
    Themselves when they be felt.
  MESSENGER. I have done my duty.
  CLEOPATRA. Is he married?
    I cannot hate thee worser than I do
    If thou again say 'Yes.'
  MESSENGER. He's married, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?
  MESSENGER. Should I lie, madam?
  CLEOPATRA. O, I would thou didst,
    So half my Egypt were submerg'd and made
    A cistern for scal'd snakes! Go, get thee hence.
    Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
    Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
  MESSENGER. I crave your Highness' pardon.
  CLEOPATRA. He is married?
  MESSENGER. Take no offence that I would not offend you;
    To punish me for what you make me do
    Seems much unequal. He's married to Octavia.
  CLEOPATRA. O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
    That art not what th'art sure of! Get thee hence.
    The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
    Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
    And be undone by 'em!                         Exit MESSENGER
  CHARMIAN. Good your Highness, patience.
  CLEOPATRA. In praising Antony I have disprais'd Caesar.
  CHARMIAN. Many times, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. I am paid for't now. Lead me from hence,
    I faint. O Iras, Charmian! 'Tis no matter.
    Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him
    Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
    Her inclination; let him not leave out
    The colour of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
                                                     Exit ALEXAS
    Let him for ever go- let him not, Charmian-
    Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
    The other way's a Mars.                         [To MARDIAN]
    Bid you Alexas
    Bring me word how tall she is.- Pity me, Charmian,
    But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.        Exeunt

SCENE VI. Near Misenum

Flourish. Enter POMPEY and MENAS at one door, with drum and trumpet; at
another, CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, ENOBARBUS, MAECENAS, AGRIPPA, with
soldiers marching

  POMPEY. Your hostages I have, so have you mine;
    And we shall talk before we fight.
  CAESAR. Most meet
    That first we come to words; and therefore have we
    Our written purposes before us sent;
    Which if thou hast considered, let us know
    If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword
    And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
    That else must perish here.
  POMPEY. To you all three,
    The senators alone of this great world,
    Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
    Wherefore my father should revengers want,
    Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
    Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
    There saw you labouring for him. What was't
    That mov'd pale Cassius to conspire? and what
    Made the all-honour'd honest Roman, Brutus,
    With the arm'd rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom,
    To drench the Capitol, but that they would
    Have one man but a man? And that is it
    Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
    The anger'd ocean foams; with which I meant
    To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
    Cast on my noble father.
  CAESAR. Take your time.
  ANTONY. Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails;
    We'll speak with thee at sea; at land thou know'st
    How much we do o'er-count thee.
  POMPEY. At land, indeed,
    Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house.
    But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
    Remain in't as thou mayst.
  LEPIDUS. Be pleas'd to tell us-
    For this is from the present- how you take
    The offers we have sent you.
  CAESAR. There's the point.
  ANTONY. Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
    What it is worth embrac'd.
  CAESAR. And what may follow,
    To try a larger fortune.
  POMPEY. You have made me offer
    Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
    Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
    Measures of wheat to Rome; this 'greed upon,
    To part with unhack'd edges and bear back
    Our targes undinted.
  ALL. That's our offer.
  POMPEY. Know, then,
    I came before you here a man prepar'd
    To take this offer; but Mark Antony
    Put me to some impatience. Though I lose
    The praise of it by telling, you must know,
    When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
    Your mother came to Sicily and did find
    Her welcome friendly.
  ANTONY. I have heard it, Pompey,
    And am well studied for a liberal thanks
    Which I do owe you.
  POMPEY. Let me have your hand.
    I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
  ANTONY. The beds i' th' East are soft; and thanks to you,
    That call'd me timelier than my purpose hither;
    For I have gained by't.
  CAESAR. Since I saw you last
    There is a change upon you.
  POMPEY. Well, I know not
    What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face;
    But in my bosom shall she never come
    To make my heart her vassal.
  LEPIDUS. Well met here.
  POMPEY. I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.
    I crave our composition may be written,
    And seal'd between us.
  CAESAR. That's the next to do.
  POMPEY. We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
    Draw lots who shall begin.
  ANTONY. That will I, Pompey.
  POMPEY. No, Antony, take the lot;
    But, first or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
    Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
    Grew fat with feasting there.
  ANTONY. You have heard much.
  POMPEY. I have fair meanings, sir.
  ANTONY. And fair words to them.
  POMPEY. Then so much have I heard;
    And I have heard Apollodorus carried-
  ENOBARBUS. No more of that! He did so.
  POMPEY. What, I pray you?
  ENOBARBUS. A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
  POMPEY. I know thee now. How far'st thou, soldier?
  ENOBARBUS. Well;
    And well am like to do, for I perceive
    Four feasts are toward.
  POMPEY. Let me shake thy hand.
    I never hated thee; I have seen thee fight,
    When I have envied thy behaviour.
  ENOBARBUS. Sir,
    I never lov'd you much; but I ha' prais'd ye
    When you have well deserv'd ten times as much
    As I have said you did.
  POMPEY. Enjoy thy plainness;
    It nothing ill becomes thee.
    Aboard my galley I invite you all.
    Will you lead, lords?
  ALL. Show's the way, sir.
  POMPEY. Come.               Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS and MENAS
  MENAS. [Aside] Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have made this
    treaty.- You and I have known, sir.
  ENOBARBUS. At sea, I think.
  MENAS. We have, sir.
  ENOBARBUS. You have done well by water.
  MENAS. And you by land.
  ENOBARBUS. I Will praise any man that will praise me; though it
    cannot be denied what I have done by land.
  MENAS. Nor what I have done by water.
  ENOBARBUS. Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you
    have been a great thief by sea.
  MENAS. And you by land.
  ENOBARBUS. There I deny my land service. But give me your hand,
    Menas; if our eyes had authority, here they might take two
    thieves kissing.
  MENAS. All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.
  ENOBARBUS. But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
  MENAS. No slander: they steal hearts.
  ENOBARBUS. We came hither to fight with you.
  MENAS. For my part, I am sorry it is turn'd to a drinking.
    Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
  ENOBARBUS. If he do, sure he cannot weep't back again.
  MENAS. Y'have said, sir. We look'd not for Mark Antony here. Pray
    you, is he married to Cleopatra?
  ENOBARBUS. Caesar' sister is call'd Octavia.
  MENAS. True, sir; she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
  ENOBARBUS. But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
  MENAS. Pray ye, sir?
  ENOBARBUS. 'Tis true.
  MENAS. Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
  ENOBARBUS. If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not
    prophesy so.
  MENAS. I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage
    than the love of the parties.
  ENOBARBUS. I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems
    to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of
    their amity: Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
  MENAS. Who would not have his wife so?
  ENOBARBUS. Not he that himself is not so; which is Mark Antony. He
    will to his Egyptian dish again; then shall the sighs of Octavia
    blow the fire up in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is
    the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of
    their variance. Antony will use his affection where it is; he
    married but his occasion here.
  MENAS. And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a
    health for you.
  ENOBARBUS. I shall take it, sir. We have us'd our throats in Egypt.
  MENAS. Come, let's away.                                Exeunt

ACT_2|SC_7
                           SCENE VII.
             On board POMPEY'S galley, off Misenum

     Music plays. Enter two or three SERVANTS with a banquet

  FIRST SERVANT. Here they'll be, man. Some o' their plants are
    ill-rooted already; the least wind i' th' world will blow them
    down.
  SECOND SERVANT. Lepidus is high-colour'd.
  FIRST SERVANT. They have made him drink alms-drink.
  SECOND SERVANT. As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
    cries out 'No more!'; reconciles them to his entreaty and himself
    to th' drink.
  FIRST SERVANT. But it raises the greater war between him and his
    discretion.
  SECOND SERVANT. Why, this it is to have a name in great men's
    fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service
    as a partizan I could not heave.
  FIRST SERVANT. To be call'd into a huge sphere, and not to be seen
    to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully
    disaster the cheeks.

           A sennet sounded. Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS,
            POMPEY, AGRIPPA, MAECENAS, ENOBARBUS, MENAS,
                         with other CAPTAINS

  ANTONY. [To CAESAR] Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th'
      Nile
    By certain scales i' th' pyramid; they know
    By th' height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
    Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells
    The more it promises; as it ebbs, the seedsman
    Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
    And shortly comes to harvest.
  LEPIDUS. Y'have strange serpents there.
  ANTONY. Ay, Lepidus.
  LEPIDUS. Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
    operation of your sun; so is your crocodile.
  ANTONY. They are so.
  POMPEY. Sit- and some wine! A health to Lepidus!
  LEPIDUS. I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er out.
  ENOBARBUS. Not till you have slept. I fear me you'll be in till
    then.
  LEPIDUS. Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises are
    very goodly things. Without contradiction I have heard that.
  MENAS. [Aside to POMPEY] Pompey, a word.
  POMPEY. [Aside to MENAS] Say in mine ear; what is't?
  MENAS. [Aside to POMPEY] Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee,
      Captain,
    And hear me speak a word.
  POMPEY. [ Whispers in's ear ] Forbear me till anon-
    This wine for Lepidus!
  LEPIDUS. What manner o' thing is your crocodile?
  ANTONY. It is shap'd, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it
    hath breadth; it is just so high as it is, and moves with it own
    organs. It lives by that which nourisheth it, and the elements
    once out of it, it transmigrates.
  LEPIDUS. What colour is it of?
  ANTONY. Of it own colour too.
  LEPIDUS. 'Tis a strange serpent.
  ANTONY. 'Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
  CAESAR. Will this description satisfy him?
  ANTONY. With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very
    epicure.
  POMPEY. [Aside to MENAS] Go, hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that!
      Away!
    Do as I bid you.- Where's this cup I call'd for?
  MENAS. [Aside to POMPEY] If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear
      me,
    Rise from thy stool.
  POMPEY. [Aside to MENAS] I think th'art mad. [Rises and walks
    aside] The matter?
  MENAS. I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
  POMPEY. Thou hast serv'd me with much faith. What's else to say?-
    Be jolly, lords.
  ANTONY. These quicksands, Lepidus,
    Keep off them, for you sink.
  MENAS. Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
  POMPEY. What say'st thou?
  MENAS. Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.
  POMPEY. How should that be?
  MENAS. But entertain it,
    And though you think me poor, I am the man
    Will give thee all the world.
  POMPEY. Hast thou drunk well?
  MENAS. No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
    Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove;
    Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
    Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.
  POMPEY. Show me which way.
  MENAS. These three world-sharers, these competitors,
    Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable;
    And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
    All there is thine.
  POMPEY. Ah, this thou shouldst have done,
    And not have spoke on't. In me 'tis villainy:
    In thee't had been good service. Thou must know
    'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour:
    Mine honour, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
    Hath so betray'd thine act. Being done unknown,
    I should have found it afterwards well done,
    But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
  MENAS. [Aside] For this,
    I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.
    Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd,
    Shall never find it more.
  POMPEY. This health to Lepidus!
  ANTONY. Bear him ashore. I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
  ENOBARBUS. Here's to thee, Menas!
  MENAS. Enobarbus, welcome!
  POMPEY. Fill till the cup be hid.
  ENOBARBUS. There's a strong fellow, Menas.
               [Pointing to the servant who carries off LEPIDUS]
  MENAS. Why?
  ENOBARBUS. 'A bears the third part of the world, man; see'st not?
  MENAS. The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
    That it might go on wheels!
  ENOBARBUS. Drink thou; increase the reels.
  MENAS. Come.
  POMPEY. This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
  ANTONY. It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
    Here's to Caesar!
  CAESAR. I could well forbear't.
    It's monstrous labour when I wash my brain
    And it grows fouler.
  ANTONY. Be a child o' th' time.
  CAESAR. Possess it, I'll make answer.
    But I had rather fast from all four days
    Than drink so much in one.
  ENOBARBUS. [To ANTONY] Ha, my brave emperor!
    Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals
    And celebrate our drink?
  POMPEY. Let's ha't, good soldier.
  ANTONY. Come, let's all take hands,
    Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense
    In soft and delicate Lethe.
  ENOBARBUS. All take hands.
    Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
    The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing;
    The holding every man shall bear as loud
    As his strong sides can volley.
               [Music plays. ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand]

                        THE SONG
            Come, thou monarch of the vine,
            Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
            In thy fats our cares be drown'd,
            With thy grapes our hairs be crown'd.
            Cup us till the world go round,
            Cup us till the world go round!

  CAESAR. What would you more? Pompey, good night. Good brother,
    Let me request you off; our graver business
    Frowns at this levity. Gentle lords, let's part;
    You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb
    Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
    Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost
    Antick'd us all. What needs more words? Good night.
    Good Antony, your hand.
  POMPEY. I'll try you on the shore.
  ANTONY. And shall, sir. Give's your hand.
  POMPEY. O Antony,
    You have my father's house- but what? We are friends.
    Come, down into the boat.
  ENOBARBUS. Take heed you fall not.
                              Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS and MENAS
    Menas, I'll not on shore.
  MENAS. No, to my cabin.
    These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
    Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
    To these great fellows. Sound and be hang'd, sound out!
                                  [Sound a flourish, with drums]
  ENOBARBUS. Hoo! says 'a. There's my cap.
  MENAS. Hoo! Noble Captain, come.                        Exeunt
ACT_3|SC_1
                     ACT III. SCENE I.
                     A plain in Syria

       Enter VENTIDIUS, as it were in triumph, with SILIUS
      and other Romans, OFFICERS and soldiers; the dead body
                of PACORUS borne before him

  VENTIDIUS. Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
    Pleas'd fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death
    Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body
    Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
    Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
  SILIUS. Noble Ventidius,
    Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm
    The fugitive Parthians follow; spur through Media,
    Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
    The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony,
    Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
    Put garlands on thy head.
  VENTIDIUS. O Silius, Silius,
    I have done enough. A lower place, note well,
    May make too great an act; for learn this, Silius:
    Better to leave undone than by our deed
    Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away.
    Caesar and Antony have ever won
    More in their officer, than person. Sossius,
    One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
    For quick accumulation of renown,
    Which he achiev'd by th' minute, lost his favour.
    Who does i' th' wars more than his captain can
    Becomes his captain's captain; and ambition,
    The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss
    Than gain which darkens him.
    I could do more to do Antonius good,
    But 'twould offend him; and in his offence
    Should my performance perish.
  SILIUS. Thou hast, Ventidius, that
    Without the which a soldier and his sword
    Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony?
  VENTIDIUS. I'll humbly signify what in his name,
    That magical word of war, we have effected;
    How, with his banners, and his well-paid ranks,
    The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
    We have jaded out o' th' field.
  SILIUS. Where is he now?
  VENTIDIUS. He purposeth to Athens; whither, with what haste
    The weight we must convey with's will permit,
    We shall appear before him.- On, there; pass along.
                                                          Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_2
                            SCENE II. Rome. CAESAR'S house

        Enter AGRIPPA at one door, ENOBARBUS at another

  AGRIPPA. What, are the brothers parted?
  ENOBARBUS. They have dispatch'd with Pompey; he is gone;
    The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
    To part from Rome; Caesar is sad; and Lepidus,
    Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
    With the green sickness.
  AGRIPPA. 'Tis a noble Lepidus.
  ENOBARBUS. A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!
  AGRIPPA. Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
  ENOBARBUS. Caesar? Why he's the Jupiter of men.
  AGRIPPA. What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.
  ENOBARBUS. Spake you of Caesar? How! the nonpareil!
  AGRIPPA. O, Antony! O thou Arabian bird!
  ENOBARBUS. Would you praise Caesar, say 'Caesar'- go no further.
  AGRIPPA. Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
  ENOBARBUS. But he loves Caesar best. Yet he loves Antony.
    Hoo! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot
    Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number- hoo!-
    His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
    Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
  AGRIPPA. Both he loves.
  ENOBARBUS. They are his shards, and he their beetle. [Trumpets
      within] So-
    This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
  AGRIPPA. Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.

           Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA

  ANTONY. No further, sir.
  CAESAR. You take from me a great part of myself;
    Use me well in't. Sister, prove such a wife
    As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest band
    Shall pass on thy approof. Most noble Antony,
    Let not the piece of virtue which is set
    Betwixt us as the cement of our love
    To keep it builded be the ram to batter
    The fortress of it; for better might we
    Have lov'd without this mean, if on both parts
    This be not cherish'd.
  ANTONY. Make me not offended
    In your distrust.
  CAESAR. I have said.
  ANTONY. You shall not find,
    Though you be therein curious, the least cause
    For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
    And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
    We will here part.
  CAESAR. Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
    The elements be kind to thee and make
    Thy spirits all of comfort! Fare thee well.
  OCTAVIA. My noble brother!
  ANTONY. The April's in her eyes. It is love's spring,
    And these the showers to bring it on. Be cheerful.
  OCTAVIA. Sir, look well to my husband's house; and-
  CAESAR. What, Octavia?
  OCTAVIA. I'll tell you in your ear.
  ANTONY. Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
    Her heart inform her tongue- the swan's down feather,
    That stands upon the swell at the full of tide,
    And neither way inclines.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside to AGRIPPA] Will Caesar weep?
  AGRIPPA. [Aside to ENOBARBUS] He has a cloud in's face.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside to AGRIPPA] He were the worse for that, were he a
      horse;
    So is he, being a man.
  AGRIPPA. [Aside to ENOBARBUS] Why, Enobarbus,
    When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
    He cried almost to roaring; and he wept
    When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside to AGRIPPA] That year, indeed, he was troubled
      with a rheum;
    What willingly he did confound he wail'd,
    Believe't- till I weep too.
  CAESAR. No, sweet Octavia,
    You shall hear from me still; the time shall not
    Out-go my thinking on you.
  ANTONY. Come, sir, come;
    I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love.
    Look, here I have you; thus I let you go,
    And give you to the gods.
  CAESAR. Adieu; be happy!
  LEPIDUS. Let all the number of the stars give light
    To thy fair way!
  CAESAR. Farewell, farewell!                   [Kisses OCTAVIA]
  ANTONY. Farewell!                       Trumpets sound. Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_3
                          SCENE III.
              Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

         Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS

  CLEOPATRA. Where is the fellow?
  ALEXAS. Half afeard to come.
  CLEOPATRA. Go to, go to.

                Enter the MESSENGER as before

    Come hither, sir.
  ALEXAS. Good Majesty,
    Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
    But when you are well pleas'd.
  CLEOPATRA. That Herod's head
    I'll have. But how, when Antony is gone,
    Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.
  MESSENGER. Most gracious Majesty!
  CLEOPATRA. Didst thou behold Octavia?
  MESSENGER. Ay, dread Queen.
  CLEOPATRA. Where?
  MESSENGER. Madam, in Rome
    I look'd her in the face, and saw her led
    Between her brother and Mark Antony.
  CLEOPATRA. Is she as tall as me?
  MESSENGER. She is not, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongu'd or low?
  MESSENGER. Madam, I heard her speak: she is low-voic'd.
  CLEOPATRA. That's not so good. He cannot like her long.
  CHARMIAN. Like her? O Isis! 'tis impossible.
  CLEOPATRA. I think so, Charmian. Dull of tongue and dwarfish!
    What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
    If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.
  MESSENGER. She creeps.
    Her motion and her station are as one;
    She shows a body rather than a life,
    A statue than a breather.
  CLEOPATRA. Is this certain?
  MESSENGER. Or I have no observance.
  CHARMIAN. Three in Egypt
    Cannot make better note.
  CLEOPATRA. He's very knowing;
    I do perceive't. There's nothing in her yet.
    The fellow has good judgment.
  CHARMIAN. Excellent.
  CLEOPATRA. Guess at her years, I prithee.
  MESSENGER. Madam,
    She was a widow.
  CLEOPATRA. Widow? Charmian, hark!
  MESSENGER. And I do think she's thirty.
  CLEOPATRA. Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is't long or round?
  MESSENGER. Round even to faultiness.
  CLEOPATRA. For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
    Her hair, what colour?
  MESSENGER. Brown, madam; and her forehead
    As low as she would wish it.
  CLEOPATRA. There's gold for thee.
    Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
    I will employ thee back again; I find thee
    Most fit for business. Go make thee ready;
    Our letters are prepar'd.                   Exeunt MESSENGER
  CHARMIAN. A proper man.
  CLEOPATRA. Indeed, he is so. I repent me much
    That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
    This creature's no such thing.
  CHARMIAN. Nothing, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.
  CHARMIAN. Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
    And serving you so long!
  CLEOPATRA. I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian.
    But 'tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me
    Where I will write. All may be well enough.
  CHARMIAN. I warrant you, madam.                         Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_4
                          SCENE IV.
                  Athens. ANTONY'S house

                 Enter ANTONY and OCTAVIA

  ANTONY. Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that-
    That were excusable, that and thousands more
    Of semblable import- but he hath wag'd
    New wars 'gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it
    To public ear;
    Spoke scandy of me; when perforce he could not
    But pay me terms of honour, cold and sickly
    He vented them, most narrow measure lent me;
    When the best hint was given him, he not took't,
    Or did it from his teeth.
  OCTAVIA. O my good lord,
    Believe not all; or if you must believe,
    Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
    If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
    Praying for both parts.
    The good gods will mock me presently
    When I shall pray 'O, bless my lord and husband!'
    Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
    'O, bless my brother!' Husband win, win brother,
    Prays, and destroys the prayer; no mid-way
    'Twixt these extremes at all.
  ANTONY. Gentle Octavia,
    Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
    Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honour,
    I lose myself; better I were not yours
    Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
    Yourself shall go between's. The meantime, lady,
    I'll raise the preparation of a war
    Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste;
    So your desires are yours.
  OCTAVIA. Thanks to my lord.
    The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
    Your reconciler! Wars 'twixt you twain would be
    As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
    Should solder up the rift.
  ANTONY. When it appears to you where this begins,
    Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
    Can never be so equal that your love
    Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
    Choose your own company, and command what cost
    Your heart has mind to.                               Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_5
                           SCENE V.
                   Athens. ANTONY'S house

             Enter ENOBARBUS and EROS, meeting

  ENOBARBUS. How now, friend Eros!
  EROS. There's strange news come, sir.
  ENOBARBUS. What, man?
  EROS. Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
  ENOBARBUS. This is old. What is the success?
  EROS. Caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst Pompey,
    presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the
    glory of the action; and not resting here, accuses him of letters
    he had formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal, seizes him.
    So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
  ENOBARBUS. Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps- no more;
    And throw between them all the food thou hast,
    They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?
  EROS. He's walking in the garden- thus, and spurns
    The rush that lies before him; cries 'Fool Lepidus!'
    And threats the throat of that his officer
    That murd'red Pompey.
  ENOBARBUS. Our great navy's rigg'd.
  EROS. For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:
    My lord desires you presently; my news
    I might have told hereafter.
  ENOBARBUS. 'Twill be naught;
    But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
  EROS. Come, sir.                                        Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_6
                          SCENE VI.
                   Rome. CAESAR'S house

             Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MAECENAS

  CAESAR. Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more
    In Alexandria. Here's the manner of't:
    I' th' market-place, on a tribunal silver'd,
    Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
    Were publicly enthron'd; at the feet sat
    Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
    And all the unlawful issue that their lust
    Since then hath made between them. Unto her
    He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her
    Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
    Absolute queen.
  MAECENAS. This in the public eye?
  CAESAR. I' th' common show-place, where they exercise.
    His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings:
    Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia,
    He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assign'd
    Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She
    In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
    That day appear'd; and oft before gave audience,
    As 'tis reported, so.
  MAECENAS. Let Rome be thus
    Inform'd.
  AGRIPPA. Who, queasy with his insolence
    Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
  CAESAR. The people knows it, and have now receiv'd
    His accusations.
  AGRIPPA. Who does he accuse?
  CAESAR. Caesar; and that, having in Sicily
    Sextus Pompeius spoil'd, we had not rated him
    His part o' th' isle. Then does he say he lent me
    Some shipping, unrestor'd. Lastly, he frets
    That Lepidus of the triumvirate
    Should be depos'd; and, being, that we detain
    All his revenue.
  AGRIPPA. Sir, this should be answer'd.
  CAESAR. 'Tis done already, and messenger gone.
    I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
    That he his high authority abus'd,
    And did deserve his change. For what I have conquer'd
    I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia
    And other of his conquer'd kingdoms,
    Demand the like.
  MAECENAS. He'll never yield to that.
  CAESAR. Nor must not then be yielded to in this.

                Enter OCTAVIA, with her train

  OCTAVIA. Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar!
  CAESAR. That ever I should call thee cast-away!
  OCTAVIA. You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause.
  CAESAR. Why have you stol'n upon us thus? You come not
    Like Caesar's sister. The wife of Antony
    Should have an army for an usher, and
    The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
    Long ere she did appear. The trees by th' way
    Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
    Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
    Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
    Rais'd by your populous troops. But you are come
    A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
    The ostentation of our love, which left unshown
    Is often left unlov'd. We should have met you
    By sea and land, supplying every stage
    With an augmented greeting.
  OCTAVIA. Good my lord,
    To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did it
    On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
    Hearing that you prepar'd for war, acquainted
    My grieved ear withal; whereon I begg'd
    His pardon for return.
  CAESAR. Which soon he granted,
    Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him.
  OCTAVIA. Do not say so, my lord.
  CAESAR. I have eyes upon him,
    And his affairs come to me on the wind.
    Where is he now?
  OCTAVIA. My lord, in Athens.
  CAESAR. No, my most wronged sister: Cleopatra
    Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
    Up to a whore, who now are levying
    The kings o' th' earth for war. He hath assembled
    Bocchus, the king of Libya; Archelaus
    Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, king
    Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
    King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
    Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, king
    Of Comagene; Polemon and Amyntas,
    The kings of Mede and Lycaonia, with
    More larger list of sceptres.
  OCTAVIA. Ay me most wretched,
    That have my heart parted betwixt two friends,
    That does afflict each other!
  CAESAR. Welcome hither.
    Your letters did withhold our breaking forth,
    Till we perceiv'd both how you were wrong led
    And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart;
    Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
    O'er your content these strong necessities,
    But let determin'd things to destiny
    Hold unbewail'd their way. Welcome to Rome;
    Nothing more dear to me. You are abus'd
    Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
    To do you justice, make their ministers
    Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
    And ever welcome to us.
  AGRIPPA. Welcome, lady.
  MAECENAS. Welcome, dear madam.
    Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
    Only th' adulterous Antony, most large
    In his abominations, turns you off,
    And gives his potent regiment to a trull
    That noises it against us.
  OCTAVIA. Is it so, sir?
  CAESAR. Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you
    Be ever known to patience. My dear'st sister!         Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_7
                          SCENE VII.
                  ANTONY'S camp near Actium

                Enter CLEOPATRA and ENOBARBUS

  CLEOPATRA. I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
  ENOBARBUS. But why, why,
  CLEOPATRA. Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
    And say'st it is not fit.
  ENOBARBUS. Well, is it, is it?
  CLEOPATRA. Is't not denounc'd against us? Why should not we
    Be there in person?
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside] Well, I could reply:
    If we should serve with horse and mares together
    The horse were merely lost; the mares would bear
    A soldier and his horse.
  CLEOPATRA. What is't you say?
  ENOBARBUS. Your presence needs must puzzle Antony;
    Take from his heart, take from his brain, from's time,
    What should not then be spar'd. He is already
    Traduc'd for levity; and 'tis said in Rome
    That Photinus an eunuch and your maids
    Manage this war.
  CLEOPATRA. Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
    That speak against us! A charge we bear i' th' war,
    And, as the president of my kingdom, will
    Appear there for a man. Speak not against it;
    I will not stay behind.

                   Enter ANTONY and CANIDIUS

  ENOBARBUS. Nay, I have done.
    Here comes the Emperor.
  ANTONY. Is it not strange, Canidius,
    That from Tarentum and Brundusium
    He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
    And take in Toryne?- You have heard on't, sweet?
  CLEOPATRA. Celerity is never more admir'd
    Than by the negligent.
  ANTONY. A good rebuke,
    Which might have well becom'd the best of men
    To taunt at slackness. Canidius, we
    Will fight with him by sea.
  CLEOPATRA. By sea! What else?
  CANIDIUS. Why will my lord do so?
  ANTONY. For that he dares us to't.
  ENOBARBUS. So hath my lord dar'd him to single fight.
  CANIDIUS. Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
    Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
    Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off;
    And so should you.
  ENOBARBUS. Your ships are not well mann'd;
    Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
    Ingross'd by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet
    Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought;
    Their ships are yare; yours heavy. No disgrace
    Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
    Being prepar'd for land.
  ANTONY. By sea, by sea.
  ENOBARBUS. Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
    The absolute soldiership you have by land;
    Distract your army, which doth most consist
    Of war-mark'd footmen; leave unexecuted
    Your own renowned knowledge; quite forgo
    The way which promises assurance; and
    Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
    From firm security.
  ANTONY. I'll fight at sea.
  CLEOPATRA. I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.
  ANTONY. Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
    And, with the rest full-mann'd, from th' head of Actium
    Beat th' approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
    We then can do't at land.

                       Enter a MESSENGER

    Thy business?
  MESSENGER. The news is true, my lord: he is descried;
    Caesar has taken Toryne.
  ANTONY. Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible-
    Strange that his power should be. Canidius,
    Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
    And our twelve thousand horse. We'll to our ship.
    Away, my Thetis!

                       Enter a SOLDIER

    How now, worthy soldier?
  SOLDIER. O noble Emperor, do not fight by sea;
    Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt
    This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
    And the Phoenicians go a-ducking; we
    Have us'd to conquer standing on the earth
    And fighting foot to foot.
  ANTONY. Well, well- away.
                         Exeunt ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, and ENOBARBUS
  SOLDIER. By Hercules, I think I am i' th' right.
  CANIDIUS. Soldier, thou art; but his whole action grows
    Not in the power on't. So our leader's led,
    And we are women's men.
  SOLDIER. You keep by land
    The legions and the horse whole, do you not?
  CANIDIUS. Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
    Publicola, and Caelius are for sea;
    But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
    Carries beyond belief.
  SOLDIER. While he was yet in Rome,
    His power went out in such distractions as
    Beguil'd all spies.
  CANIDIUS. Who's his lieutenant, hear you?
  SOLDIER. They say one Taurus.
  CANIDIUS. Well I know the man.

                        Enter a MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. The Emperor calls Canidius.
  CANIDIUS. With news the time's with labour and throes forth
    Each minute some.                                     Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_8
                          SCENE VIII.
                      A plain near Actium

             Enter CAESAR, with his army, marching

  CAESAR. Taurus!
  TAURUS. My lord?
  CAESAR. Strike not by land; keep whole; provoke not battle
    Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
    The prescript of this scroll. Our fortune lies
    Upon this jump.                                       Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_9
                           SCENE IX.
                  Another part of the plain

                  Enter ANTONY and ENOBARBUS

  ANTONY. Set we our squadrons on yon side o' th' hill,
    In eye of Caesar's battle; from which place
    We may the number of the ships behold,
    And so proceed accordingly.                           Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_10
                           SCENE X.
                 Another part of the plain

        CANIDIUS marcheth with his land army one way
        over the stage, and TAURUS, the Lieutenant of
      CAESAR, the other way. After their going in is heard
                   the noise of a sea-fight

                    Alarum. Enter ENOBARBUS

  ENOBARBUS. Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
    Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
    With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
    To see't mine eyes are blasted.

                        Enter SCARUS

  SCARUS. Gods and goddesses,
    All the whole synod of them!
  ENOBARBUS. What's thy passion?
  SCARUS. The greater cantle of the world is lost
    With very ignorance; we have kiss'd away
    Kingdoms and provinces.
  ENOBARBUS. How appears the fight?
  SCARUS. On our side like the token'd pestilence,
    Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt-
    Whom leprosy o'ertake!- i' th' midst o' th' fight,
    When vantage like a pair of twins appear'd,
    Both as the same, or rather ours the elder-
    The breese upon her, like a cow in June-
    Hoists sails and flies.
  ENOBARBUS. That I beheld;
    Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
    Endure a further view.
  SCARUS. She once being loof'd,
    The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
    Claps on his sea-wing, and, like a doting mallard,
    Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
    I never saw an action of such shame;
    Experience, manhood, honour, ne'er before
    Did violate so itself.
  ENOBARBUS. Alack, alack!

                       Enter CANIDIUS

  CANIDIUS. Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
    And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
    Been what he knew himself, it had gone well.
    O, he has given example for our flight
    Most grossly by his own!
  ENOBARBUS. Ay, are you thereabouts?
    Why then, good night indeed.
  CANIDIUS. Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
  SCARUS. 'Tis easy to't; and there I will attend
    What further comes.
  CANIDIUS. To Caesar will I render
    My legions and my horse; six kings already
    Show me the way of yielding.
  ENOBARBUS. I'll yet follow
    The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
    Sits in the wind against me.                          Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_11
                         SCENE XI.
              Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

               Enter ANTONY With attendants

  ANTONY. Hark! the land bids me tread no more upon't;
    It is asham'd to bear me. Friends, come hither.
    I am so lated in the world that I
    Have lost my way for ever. I have a ship
    Laden with gold; take that; divide it. Fly,
    And make your peace with Caesar.
  ALL. Fly? Not we!
  ANTONY. I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards
    To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone;
    I have myself resolv'd upon a course
    Which has no need of you; be gone.
    My treasure's in the harbour, take it. O,
    I follow'd that I blush to look upon.
    My very hairs do mutiny; for the white
    Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
    For fear and doting. Friends, be gone; you shall
    Have letters from me to some friends that will
    Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
    Nor make replies of loathness; take the hint
    Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left
    Which leaves itself. To the sea-side straight way.
    I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
    Leave me, I pray, a little; pray you now;
    Nay, do so, for indeed I have lost command;
    Therefore I pray you. I'll see you by and by.    [Sits down]

            Enter CLEOPATRA, led by CHARMIAN and IRAS,
                         EROS following

  EROS. Nay, gentle madam, to him! Comfort him.
  IRAS. Do, most dear Queen.
  CHARMIAN. Do? Why, what else?
  CLEOPATRA. Let me sit down. O Juno!
  ANTONY. No, no, no, no, no.
  EROS. See you here, sir?
  ANTONY. O, fie, fie, fie!
  CHARMIAN. Madam!
  IRAS. Madam, O good Empress!
  EROS. Sir, sir!
  ANTONY. Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept
    His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
    The lean and wrinkled Cassius; and 'twas I
    That the mad Brutus ended; he alone
    Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
    In the brave squares of war. Yet now- no matter.
  CLEOPATRA. Ah, stand by!
  EROS. The Queen, my lord, the Queen!
  IRAS. Go to him, madam, speak to him.
    He is unqualitied with very shame.
  CLEOPATRA. Well then, sustain me. O!
 EROS. Most noble sir, arise; the Queen approaches.
    Her head's declin'd, and death will seize her but
    Your comfort makes the rescue.
  ANTONY. I have offended reputation-
    A most unnoble swerving.
  EROS. Sir, the Queen.
  ANTONY. O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See
    How I convey my shame out of thine eyes
    By looking back what I have left behind
    'Stroy'd in dishonour.
  CLEOPATRA. O my lord, my lord,
    Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
    You would have followed.
  ANTONY. Egypt, thou knew'st too well
    My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings,
    And thou shouldst tow me after. O'er my spirit
    Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
    Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
    Command me.
  CLEOPATRA. O, my pardon!
  ANTONY. Now I must
    To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
    And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
    With half the bulk o' th' world play'd as I pleas'd,
    Making and marring fortunes. You did know
    How much you were my conqueror, and that
    My sword, made weak by my affection, would
    Obey it on all cause.
  CLEOPATRA. Pardon, pardon!
  ANTONY. Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
    All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss;
    Even this repays me.
    We sent our schoolmaster; is 'a come back?
    Love, I am full of lead. Some wine,
    Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
    We scorn her most when most she offers blows.         Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_12
                         SCENE XII.
                   CAESAR'S camp in Egypt

   Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others

  CAESAR. Let him appear that's come from Antony.
    Know you him?
  DOLABELLA. Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster:
    An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither
    He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
    Which had superfluous kings for messengers
    Not many moons gone by.

            Enter EUPHRONIUS, Ambassador from ANTONY

  CAESAR. Approach, and speak.
  EUPHRONIUS. Such as I am, I come from Antony.
    I was of late as petty to his ends
    As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
    To his grand sea.
  CAESAR. Be't so. Declare thine office.
  EUPHRONIUS. Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
    Requires to live in Egypt; which not granted,
    He lessens his requests and to thee sues
    To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
    A private man in Athens. This for him.
    Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness,
    Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
    The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
    Now hazarded to thy grace.
  CAESAR. For Antony,
    I have no ears to his request. The Queen
    Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
    From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
    Or take his life there. This if she perform,
    She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
  EUPHRONIUS. Fortune pursue thee!
  CAESAR. Bring him through the bands.           Exit EUPHRONIUS
    [To THYREUS] To try thy eloquence, now 'tis time. Dispatch;
    From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,
    And in our name, what she requires; add more,
    From thine invention, offers. Women are not
    In their best fortunes strong; but want will perjure
    The ne'er-touch'd vestal. Try thy cunning, Thyreus;
    Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
    Will answer as a law.
  THYREUS. Caesar, I go.
  CAESAR. Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
    And what thou think'st his very action speaks
    In every power that moves.
  THYREUS. Caesar, I shall.                               Exeunt

ACT_3|SC_13
                           SCENE XIII.
               Alexandria. CLEOPATRA'S palace

        Enter CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, and IRAS

  CLEOPATRA. What shall we do, Enobarbus?
  ENOBARBUS. Think, and die.
  CLEOPATRA. Is Antony or we in fault for this?
  ENOBARBUS. Antony only, that would make his will
    Lord of his reason. What though you fled
    From that great face of war, whose several ranges
    Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
    The itch of his affection should not then
    Have nick'd his captainship, at such a point,
    When half to half the world oppos'd, he being
    The mered question. 'Twas a shame no less
    Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
    And leave his navy gazing.
  CLEOPATRA. Prithee, peace.

          Enter EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador; with ANTONY

  ANTONY. Is that his answer?
  EUPHRONIUS. Ay, my lord.
  ANTONY. The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
    Will yield us up.
  EUPHRONIUS. He says so.
  ANTONY. Let her know't.
    To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
    And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
    With principalities.
  CLEOPATRA. That head, my lord?
  ANTONY. To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
    Of youth upon him; from which the world should note
    Something particular. His coin, ships, legions,
    May be a coward's whose ministers would prevail
    Under the service of a child as soon
    As i' th' command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
    To lay his gay comparisons apart,
    And answer me declin'd, sword against sword,
    Ourselves alone. I'll write it. Follow me.
                                    Exeunt ANTONY and EUPHRONIUS
  EUPHRONIUS. [Aside] Yes, like enough high-battled Caesar will
    Unstate his happiness, and be stag'd to th' show
    Against a sworder! I see men's judgments are
    A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
    Do draw the inward quality after them,
    To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
    Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
    Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdu'd
    His judgment too.

                       Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT. A messenger from Caesar.
  CLEOPATRA. What, no more ceremony? See, my women!
    Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
    That kneel'd unto the buds. Admit him, sir.     Exit SERVANT
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside] Mine honesty and I begin to square.
    The loyalty well held to fools does make
    Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
    To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
    Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
    And earns a place i' th' story.

                       Enter THYREUS

  CLEOPATRA. Caesar's will?
  THYREUS. Hear it apart.
  CLEOPATRA. None but friends: say boldly.
  THYREUS. So, haply, are they friends to Antony.
  ENOBARBUS. He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
    Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
    Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
    Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.
  THYREUS. So.
    Thus then, thou most renown'd: Caesar entreats
    Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
    Further than he is Caesar.
  CLEOPATRA. Go on. Right royal!
  THYREUS. He knows that you embrace not Antony
    As you did love, but as you fear'd him.
  CLEOPATRA. O!
  THYREUS. The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
    Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
    Not as deserv'd.
  CLEOPATRA. He is a god, and knows
    What is most right. Mine honour was not yielded,
    But conquer'd merely.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside] To be sure of that,
    I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
    That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
    Thy dearest quit thee.                                  Exit
  THYREUS. Shall I say to Caesar
    What you require of him? For he partly begs
    To be desir'd to give. It much would please him
    That of his fortunes you should make a staff
    To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
    To hear from me you had left Antony,
    And put yourself under his shroud,
    The universal landlord.
  CLEOPATRA. What's your name?
  THYREUS. My name is Thyreus.
  CLEOPATRA. Most kind messenger,
    Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
    I kiss his conquring hand. Tell him I am prompt
    To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
    Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
    The doom of Egypt.
  THYREUS. 'Tis your noblest course.
    Wisdom and fortune combating together,
    If that the former dare but what it can,
    No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
    My duty on your hand.
  CLEOPATRA. Your Caesar's father oft,
    When he hath mus'd of taking kingdoms in,
    Bestow'd his lips on that unworthy place,
    As it rain'd kisses.

                Re-enter ANTONY and ENOBARBUS

  ANTONY. Favours, by Jove that thunders!
    What art thou, fellow?
  THYREUS. One that but performs
    The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
    To have command obey'd.
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside] You will be whipt.
  ANTONY. Approach there.- Ah, you kite!- Now, gods and devils!
    Authority melts from me. Of late, when I cried 'Ho!'
    Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth
    And cry 'Your will?' Have you no ears? I am
    Antony yet.

                       Enter servants

    Take hence this Jack and whip him.
  ENOBARBUS. 'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
    Than with an old one dying.
  ANTONY. Moon and stars!
    Whip him. Were't twenty of the greatest tributaries
    That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
    So saucy with the hand of she here- what's her name
    Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
    Till like a boy you see him cringe his face,
    And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.
  THYMUS. Mark Antony-
  ANTONY. Tug him away. Being whipt,
    Bring him again: the Jack of Caesar's shall
    Bear us an errand to him.       Exeunt servants with THYREUS
    You were half blasted ere I knew you. Ha!
    Have I my pillow left unpress'd in Rome,
    Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
    And by a gem of women, to be abus'd
    By one that looks on feeders?
  CLEOPATRA. Good my lord-
  ANTONY. You have been a boggler ever.
    But when we in our viciousness grow hard-
    O misery on't!- the wise gods seel our eyes,
    In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us
    Adore our errors, laugh at's while we strut
    To our confusion.
  CLEOPATRA. O, is't come to this?
  ANTONY. I found you as a morsel cold upon
    Dead Caesar's trencher. Nay, you were a fragment
    Of Cneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
    Unregist'red in vulgar fame, you have
    Luxuriously pick'd out; for I am sure,
    Though you can guess what temperance should be,
    You know not what it is.
  CLEOPATRA. Wherefore is this?
  ANTONY. To let a fellow that will take rewards,
    And say 'God quit you!' be familiar with
    My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal
    And plighter of high hearts! O that I were
    Upon the hill of Basan to outroar
    The horned herd! For I have savage cause,
    And to proclaim it civilly were like
    A halter'd neck which does the hangman thank
    For being yare about him.

              Re-enter a SERVANT with THYREUS

    Is he whipt?
  SERVANT. Soundly, my lord.
  ANTONY. Cried he? and begg'd 'a pardon?
  SERVANT. He did ask favour.
  ANTONY. If that thy father live, let him repent
    Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
    To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
    Thou hast been whipt for following him. Henceforth
    The white hand of a lady fever thee!
    Shake thou to look on't. Get thee back to Caesar;
    Tell him thy entertainment; look thou say
    He makes me angry with him; for he seems
    Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
    Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry;
    And at this time most easy 'tis to do't,
    When my good stars, that were my former guides,
    Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
    Into th' abysm of hell. If he mislike
    My speech and what is done, tell him he has
    Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
    He may at pleasure whip or hang or torture,
    As he shall like, to quit me. Urge it thou.
    Hence with thy stripes, be gone.                Exit THYREUS
  CLEOPATRA. Have you done yet?
  ANTONY. Alack, our terrene moon
    Is now eclips'd, and it portends alone
    The fall of Antony.
  CLEOPATRA. I must stay his time.
  ANTONY. To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
    With one that ties his points?
  CLEOPATRA. Not know me yet?
  ANTONY. Cold-hearted toward me?
  CLEOPATRA. Ah, dear, if I be so,
    From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
    And poison it in the source, and the first stone
    Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
    Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
    Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
    Together with my brave Egyptians all,
    By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
    Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
    Have buried them for prey.
  ANTONY. I am satisfied.
    Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
    I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
    Hath nobly held; our sever'd navy to
    Have knit again, and fleet, threat'ning most sea-like.
    Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady?
    If from the field I shall return once more
    To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
    I and my sword will earn our chronicle.
    There's hope in't yet.
  CLEOPATRA. That's my brave lord!
  ANTONY. I will be treble-sinew'd, hearted, breath'd,
    And fight maliciously. For when mine hours
    Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
    Of me for jests; but now I'll set my teeth,
    And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
    Let's have one other gaudy night. Call to me
    All my sad captains; fill our bowls once more;
    Let's mock the midnight bell.
  CLEOPATRA. It is my birthday.
    I had thought t'have held it poor; but since my lord
    Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
  ANTONY. We will yet do well.
  CLEOPATRA. Call all his noble captains to my lord.
  ANTONY. Do so, we'll speak to them; and to-night I'll force
    The wine peep through their scars. Come on, my queen,
    There's sap in't yet. The next time I do fight
    I'll make death love me; for I will contend
    Even with his pestilent scythe.     Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS
  ENOBARBUS. Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
    Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
    The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
    A diminution in our captain's brain
    Restores his heart. When valour preys on reason,
    It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
    Some way to leave him.                                  Exit

ACT_4|SC_1
                      ACT IV. SCENE I.
              CAESAR'S camp before Alexandria

      Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MAECENAS, with his army;
                 CAESAR reading a letter

  CAESAR. He calls me boy, and chides as he had power
    To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
    He hath whipt with rods; dares me to personal combat,
    Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
    I have many other ways to die, meantime
    Laugh at his challenge.
  MAECENAS. Caesar must think
    When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
    Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
    Make boot of his distraction. Never anger
    Made good guard for itself.
  CAESAR. Let our best heads
    Know that to-morrow the last of many battles
    We mean to fight. Within our files there are
    Of those that serv'd Mark Antony but late
    Enough to fetch him in. See it done;
    And feast the army; we have store to do't,
    And they have earn'd the waste. Poor Antony!          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_2
                          SCENE II.
               Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace

      Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, IRAS,
                     ALEXAS, with others

  ANTONY. He will not fight with me, Domitius?
  ENOBARBUS. No.
  ANTONY. Why should he not?
  ENOBARBUS. He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
    He is twenty men to one.
  ANTONY. To-morrow, soldier,
    By sea and land I'll fight. Or I will live,
    Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
    Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?
  ENOBARBUS. I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.'
  ANTONY. Well said; come on.
    Call forth my household servants; let's to-night
    Be bounteous at our meal.

                Enter three or four servitors

    Give me thy hand,
    Thou has been rightly honest. So hast thou;
    Thou, and thou, and thou. You have serv'd me well,
    And kings have been your fellows.
  CLEOPATRA. [Aside to ENOBARBUS] What means this?
  ENOBARBUS. [Aside to CLEOPATRA] 'Tis one of those odd tricks which
      sorrow shoots
    Out of the mind.
  ANTONY. And thou art honest too.
    I wish I could be made so many men,
    And all of you clapp'd up together in
    An Antony, that I might do you service
    So good as you have done.
  SERVANT. The gods forbid!
  ANTONY. Well, my good fellows, wait on me to-night.
    Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
    As when mine empire was your fellow too,
    And suffer'd my command.
  CLEOPATRA. [Aside to ENOBARBUS] What does he mean?
    ENOBARBUS. [Aside to CLEOPATRA] To make his followers weep.
  ANTONY. Tend me to-night;
    May be it is the period of your duty.
    Haply you shall not see me more; or if,
    A mangled shadow. Perchance to-morrow
    You'll serve another master. I look on you
    As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
    I turn you not away; but, like a master
    Married to your good service, stay till death.
    Tend me to-night two hours, I ask no more,
    And the gods yield you for't!
  ENOBARBUS. What mean you, sir,
    To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep;
    And I, an ass, am onion-ey'd. For shame!
    Transform us not to women.
  ANTONY. Ho, ho, ho!
    Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
    Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty friends,
    You take me in too dolorous a sense;
    For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
    To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts,
    I hope well of to-morrow, and will lead you
    Where rather I'll expect victorious life
    Than death and honour. Let's to supper, come,
    And drown consideration.                              Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_3
                          SCENE III.
             Alexandria. Before CLEOPATRA's palace

                 Enter a company of soldiers

  FIRST SOLDIER. Brother, good night. To-morrow is the day.
  SECOND SOLDIER. It will determine one way. Fare you well.
    Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
  FIRST SOLDIER. Nothing. What news?
  SECOND SOLDIER. Belike 'tis but a rumour. Good night to you.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Well, sir, good night.
                                      [They meet other soldiers]
  SECOND SOLDIER. Soldiers, have careful watch.
  FIRST SOLDIER. And you. Good night, good night.
                [The two companies separate and place themselves
                                   in every corner of the stage]
  SECOND SOLDIER. Here we. And if to-morrow
    Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
    Our landmen will stand up.
  THIRD SOLDIER. 'Tis a brave army,
    And full of purpose.
                      [Music of the hautboys is under the stage]
  SECOND SOLDIER. Peace, what noise?
  THIRD SOLDIER. List, list!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Hark!
  THIRD SOLDIER. Music i' th' air.
  FOURTH SOLDIER. Under the earth.
  THIRD SOLDIER. It signs well, does it not?
  FOURTH SOLDIER. No.
  THIRD SOLDIER. Peace, I say!
    What should this mean?
  SECOND SOLDIER. 'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony lov'd,
    Now leaves him.
  THIRD SOLDIER. Walk; let's see if other watchmen
    Do hear what we do.
  SECOND SOLDIER. How now, masters!
  SOLDIERS. [Speaking together] How now!
    How now! Do you hear this?
  FIRST SOLDIER. Ay; is't not strange?
  THIRD SOLDIER. Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?
  FIRST SOLDIER. Follow the noise so far as we have quarter;
    Let's see how it will give off.
  SOLDIERS. Content. 'Tis strange.                        Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_4
                           SCENE IV.
               Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace

         Enter ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS,
                          with others

  ANTONY. Eros! mine armour, Eros!
  CLEOPATRA. Sleep a little.
  ANTONY. No, my chuck. Eros! Come, mine armour, Eros!

                   Enter EROS with armour

    Come, good fellow, put mine iron on.
    If fortune be not ours to-day, it is
    Because we brave her. Come.
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, I'll help too.
    What's this for?
  ANTONY. Ah, let be, let be! Thou art
    The armourer of my heart. False, false; this, this.
  CLEOPATRA. Sooth, la, I'll help. Thus it must be.
  ANTONY. Well, well;
    We shall thrive now. Seest thou, my good fellow?
    Go put on thy defences.
  EROS. Briefly, sir.
  CLEOPATRA. Is not this buckled well?
  ANTONY. Rarely, rarely!
    He that unbuckles this, till we do please
    To daff't for our repose, shall hear a storm.
    Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
    More tight at this than thou. Dispatch. O love,
    That thou couldst see my wars to-day, and knew'st
    The royal occupation! Thou shouldst see
    A workman in't.

                   Enter an armed SOLDIER

    Good-morrow to thee. Welcome.
    Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge.
    To business that we love we rise betime,
    And go to't with delight.
  SOLDIER. A thousand, sir,
    Early though't be, have on their riveted trim,
    And at the port expect you.
                            [Shout. Flourish of trumpets within]

                 Enter CAPTAINS and soldiers

  CAPTAIN. The morn is fair. Good morrow, General.
  ALL. Good morrow, General.
  ANTONY. 'Tis well blown, lads.
    This morning, like the spirit of a youth
    That means to be of note, begins betimes.
    So, so. Come, give me that. This way. Well said.
    Fare thee well, dame, whate'er becomes of me.
    This is a soldier's kiss. Rebukeable,
    And worthy shameful check it were, to stand
    On more mechanic compliment; I'll leave thee
    Now like a man of steel. You that will fight,
    Follow me close; I'll bring you to't. Adieu.
                      Exeunt ANTONY, EROS, CAPTAINS and soldiers
  CHARMIAN. Please you retire to your chamber?
  CLEOPATRA. Lead me.
    He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
    Determine this great war in single fight!
    Then, Antony- but now. Well, on.                      Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_5
                          SCENE V.
                  Alexandria. ANTONY'S camp

        Trumpets sound. Enter ANTONY and EROS, a SOLDIER
                       meeting them

  SOLDIER. The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
  ANTONY. Would thou and those thy scars had once prevail'd
    To make me fight at land!
  SOLDIER. Hadst thou done so,
    The kings that have revolted, and the soldier
    That has this morning left thee, would have still
    Followed thy heels.
  ANTONY. Who's gone this morning?
  SOLDIER. Who?
    One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
    He shall not hear thee; or from Caesar's camp
    Say 'I am none of thine.'
  ANTONY. What say'st thou?
  SOLDIER. Sir,
    He is with Caesar.
  EROS. Sir, his chests and treasure
    He has not with him.
  ANTONY. Is he gone?
  SOLDIER. Most certain.
  ANTONY. Go, Eros, send his treasure after; do it;
    Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him-
    I will subscribe- gentle adieus and greetings;
    Say that I wish he never find more cause
    To change a master. O, my fortunes have
    Corrupted honest men! Dispatch. Enobarbus!            Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_6
                         SCENE VI.
                 Alexandria. CAESAR'S camp

       Flourish. Enter AGRIPPA, CAESAR, With DOLABELLA
                       and ENOBARBUS

  CAESAR. Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
    Our will is Antony be took alive;
    Make it so known.
  AGRIPPA. Caesar, I shall.                                 Exit
  CAESAR. The time of universal peace is near.
    Prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nook'd world
    Shall bear the olive freely.

                     Enter A MESSENGER

  MESSENGER. Antony
    Is come into the field.
  CAESAR. Go charge Agrippa
    Plant those that have revolted in the vant,
    That Antony may seem to spend his fury
    Upon himself.                       Exeunt all but ENOBARBUS
  ENOBARBUS. Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
    Affairs of Antony; there did dissuade
    Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
    And leave his master Antony. For this pains
    Casaer hath hang'd him. Canidius and the rest
    That fell away have entertainment, but
    No honourable trust. I have done ill,
    Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
    That I will joy no more.

                  Enter a SOLDIER of CAESAR'S

  SOLDIER. Enobarbus, Antony
    Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
    His bounty overplus. The messenger
    Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
    Unloading of his mules.
  ENOBARBUS. I give it you.
  SOLDIER. Mock not, Enobarbus.
    I tell you true. Best you saf'd the bringer
    Out of the host. I must attend mine office,
    Or would have done't myself. Your emperor
    Continues still a Jove.                                 Exit
  ENOBARBUS. I am alone the villain of the earth,
    And feel I am so most. O Antony,
    Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
    My better service, when my turpitude
    Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart.
    If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
    Shall outstrike thought; but thought will do't, I feel.
    I fight against thee? No! I will go seek
    Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
    My latter part of life.                                 Exit

ACT_4|SC_7
                          SCENE VII.
             Field of battle between the camps

         Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA
                        and others

  AGRIPPA. Retire. We have engag'd ourselves too far.
    Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
    Exceeds what we expected.                             Exeunt

          Alarums. Enter ANTONY, and SCARUS wounded

  SCARUS. O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed!
    Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
    With clouts about their heads.
  ANTONY. Thou bleed'st apace.
  SCARUS. I had a wound here that was like a T,
    But now 'tis made an H.
  ANTONY. They do retire.
  SCARUS. We'll beat'em into bench-holes. I have yet
    Room for six scotches more.

                        Enter EROS

  EROS. They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
    For a fair victory.
  SCARUS. Let us score their backs
    And snatch 'em up, as we take hares, behind.
    'Tis sport to maul a runner.
  ANTONY. I will reward thee
    Once for thy sprightly comfort, and tenfold
    For thy good valour. Come thee on.
    SCARUS. I'll halt after.                              Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_8
                         SCENE VIII.
               Under the walls of Alexandria

        Alarum. Enter ANTONY, again in a march; SCARUS
                        with others

  ANTONY. We have beat him to his camp. Run one before
    And let the Queen know of our gests. To-morrow,
    Before the sun shall see's, we'll spill the blood
    That has to-day escap'd. I thank you all;
    For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
    Not as you serv'd the cause, but as't had been
    Each man's like mine; you have shown all Hectors.
    Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
    Tell them your feats; whilst they with joyful tears
    Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
    The honour'd gashes whole.

                 Enter CLEOPATRA, attended

    [To SCARUS] Give me thy hand-
    To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
    Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o' th' world,
    Chain mine arm'd neck. Leap thou, attire and all,
    Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
    Ride on the pants triumphing.
  CLEOPATRA. Lord of lords!
    O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
    The world's great snare uncaught?
  ANTONY. Mine nightingale,
    We have beat them to their beds. What, girl! though grey
    Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha' we
    A brain that nourishes our nerves, and can
    Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man;
    Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand-
    Kiss it, my warrior- he hath fought to-day
    As if a god in hate of mankind had
    Destroyed in such a shape.
  CLEOPATRA. I'll give thee, friend,
    An armour all of gold; it was a king's.
  ANTONY. He has deserv'd it, were it carbuncled
    Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand.
    Through Alexandria make a jolly march;
    Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them.
    Had our great palace the capacity
    To camp this host, we all would sup together,
    And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
    Which promises royal peril. Trumpeters,
    With brazen din blast you the city's ear;
    Make mingle with our rattling tabourines,
    That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together
    Applauding our approach.                              Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_9
                         SCENE IX.
                      CAESAR'S camp

      Enter a CENTURION and his company; ENOBARBUS follows

  CENTURION. If we be not reliev'd within this hour,
    We must return to th' court of guard. The night
    Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
    By th' second hour i' th' morn.
  FIRST WATCH. This last day was
    A shrewd one to's.
  ENOBARBUS. O, bear me witness, night-
  SECOND WATCH. What man is this?
  FIRST WATCH. Stand close and list him.
  ENOBARBUS. Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
    When men revolted shall upon record
    Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
    Before thy face repent!
  CENTURION. Enobarbus?
  SECOND WATCH. Peace!
    Hark further.
  ENOBARBUS. O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
    The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
    That life, a very rebel to my will,
    May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
    Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
    Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
    And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
    Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
    Forgive me in thine own particular,
    But let the world rank me in register
    A master-leaver and a fugitive!
    O Antony! O Antony!                                   [Dies]
  FIRST WATCH. Let's speak to him.
  CENTURION. Let's hear him, for the things he speaks
    May concern Caesar.
  SECOND WATCH. Let's do so. But he sleeps.
  CENTURION. Swoons rather; for so bad a prayer as his
    Was never yet for sleep.
  FIRST WATCH. Go we to him.
  SECOND WATCH. Awake, sir, awake; speak to us.
  FIRST WATCH. Hear you, sir?
  CENTURION. The hand of death hath raught him.
    [Drums afar off ] Hark! the drums
    Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
    To th' court of guard; he is of note. Our hour
    Is fully out.
  SECOND WATCH. Come on, then;
    He may recover yet.                     Exeunt with the body

ACT_4|SC_10
                          SCENE X.
                    Between the two camps

            Enter ANTONY and SCARUS, with their army

  ANTONY. Their preparation is to-day by sea;
    We please them not by land.
  SCARUS. For both, my lord.
  ANTONY. I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air;
    We'd fight there too. But this it is, our foot
    Upon the hills adjoining to the city
    Shall stay with us- Order for sea is given;
    They have put forth the haven-
    Where their appointment we may best discover
    And look on their endeavour.                          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_11
                         SCENE XI.
                    Between the camps

                Enter CAESAR and his army

  CAESAR. But being charg'd, we will be still by land,
    Which, as I take't, we shall; for his best force
    Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
    And hold our best advantage.                          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_12
                         SCENE XII.
                  A hill near Alexandria

                  Enter ANTONY and SCARUS

  ANTONY. Yet they are not join'd. Where yond pine does stand
    I shall discover all. I'll bring thee word
    Straight how 'tis like to go.                           Exit
  SCARUS. Swallows have built
    In Cleopatra's sails their nests. The augurers
    Say they know not, they cannot tell; look grimly,
    And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
    Is valiant and dejected; and by starts
    His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
    Of what he has and has not.
                            [Alarum afar off, as at a sea-fight]

                      Re-enter ANTONY

  ANTONY. All is lost!
    This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
    My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
    They cast their caps up and carouse together
    Like friends long lost. Triple-turn'd whore! 'tis thou
    Hast sold me to this novice; and my heart
    Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly;
    For when I am reveng'd upon my charm,
    I have done all. Bid them all fly; begone.       Exit SCARUS
    O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more!
    Fortune and Antony part here; even here
    Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
    That spaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave
    Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
    On blossoming Caesar; and this pine is bark'd
    That overtopp'd them all. Betray'd I am.
    O this false soul of Egypt! this grave charm-
    Whose eye beck'd forth my wars and call'd them home,
    Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end-
    Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
    Beguil'd me to the very heart of loss.
    What, Eros, Eros!

                      Enter CLEOPATRA

    Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
  CLEOPATRA. Why is my lord enrag'd against his love?
  ANTONY. Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
    And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee
    And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians;
    Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
    Of all thy sex; most monster-like, be shown
    For poor'st diminutives, for doits, and let
    Patient Octavia plough thy visage up
    With her prepared nails.                      Exit CLEOPATRA
    'Tis well th'art gone,
    If it be well to live; but better 'twere
    Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
    Might have prevented many. Eros, ho!
    The shirt of Nessus is upon me; teach me,
    Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage;
    Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' th' moon,
    And with those hands that grasp'd the heaviest club
    Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die.
    To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
    Under this plot. She dies for't. Eros, ho!              Exit

ACT_4|SC_13
                          SCENE XIII.
               Alexandria. CLEOPATRA's palace

      Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN

  CLEOPATRA. Help me, my women. O, he is more mad
    Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
    Was never so emboss'd.
  CHARMIAN. To th'monument!
    There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.
    The soul and body rive not more in parting
    Than greatness going off.
  CLEOPATRA. To th' monument!
    Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself;
    Say that the last I spoke was 'Antony'
    And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
    And bring me how he takes my death. To th' monument!
                                                          Exeunt

ACT_4|SC_14
                          SCENE XIV.
                     CLEOPATRA'S palace

                   Enter ANTONY and EROS

  ANTONY. Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
  EROS. Ay, noble lord.
  ANTONY. Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish;
    A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
    A tower'd citadel, a pendent rock,
    A forked mountain, or blue promontory
    With trees upon't that nod unto the world
    And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs;
    They are black vesper's pageants.
  EROS. Ay, my lord.
  ANTONY. That which is now a horse, even with a thought
    The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct,
    As water is in water.
  EROS. It does, my lord.
  ANTONY. My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
    Even such a body. Here I am Antony;
    Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
    I made these wars for Egypt; and the Queen-
    Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine,
    Which, whilst it was mine, had annex'd unto't
    A million moe, now lost- she, Eros, has
    Pack'd cards with Caesar, and false-play'd my glory
    Unto an enemy's triumph.
    Nay, weep not, gentle Eros; there is left us
    Ourselves to end ourselves.

                         Enter MARDIAN

    O, thy vile lady!
    She has robb'd me of my sword.
  MARDIAN. No, Antony;
    My mistress lov'd thee, and her fortunes mingled
    With thine entirely.
  ANTONY. Hence, saucy eunuch; peace!
    She hath betray'd me, and shall die the death.
  MARDIAN. Death of one person can be paid but once,
    And that she has discharg'd. What thou wouldst do
    Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake
    Was 'Antony! most noble Antony!'
    Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
    The name of Antony; it was divided
    Between her heart and lips. She rend'red life,
    Thy name so buried in her.
  ANTONY. Dead then?
  MARDIAN. Dead.
  ANTONY. Unarm, Eros; the long day's task is done,
    And we must sleep. That thou depart'st hence safe
    Does pay thy labour richly. Go.                 Exit MARDIAN
    Off, pluck off!
    The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
    The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
    Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
    Crack thy frail case. Apace, Eros, apace.-
    No more a soldier. Bruised pieces, go;
    You have been nobly borne.- From me awhile.        Exit EROS
    I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
    Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
    All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
    Lie down, and stray no farther. Now all labour
    Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
    Itself with strength. Seal then, and all is done.
    Eros!- I come, my queen.- Eros!- Stay for me;
    Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
    And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
    Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
    And all the haunt be ours.- Come, Eros, Eros!

                       Re-enter EROS

  EROS. What would my lord?
  ANTONY. Since Cleopatra died,
    I have liv'd in such dishonour that the gods
    Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
    Quarter'd the world, and o'er green Neptune's back
    With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
    The courage of a woman; less noble mind
    Than she which by her death our Caesar tells
    'I am conqueror of myself.' Thou art sworn, Eros,
    That, when the exigent should come- which now
    Is come indeed- when I should see behind me
    Th' inevitable prosecution of
    Disgrace and horror, that, on my command,
    Thou then wouldst kill me. Do't; the time is come.
    Thou strik'st not me; 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
    Put colour in thy cheek.
  EROS. The gods withhold me!
    Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
    Though enemy, lost aim and could not?
  ANTONY. Eros,
    Wouldst thou be window'd in great Rome and see
    Thy master thus with pleach'd arms, bending down
    His corrigible neck, his face subdu'd
    To penetrative shame, whilst the wheel'd seat
    Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
    His baseness that ensued?
  EROS. I would not see't.
  ANTONY. Come, then; for with a wound I must be cur'd.
    Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
    Most useful for thy country.
  EROS. O, sir, pardon me!
  ANTONY. When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
    To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
    Or thy precedent services are all
    But accidents unpurpos'd. Draw, and come.
  EROS. Turn from me then that noble countenance,
    Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
  ANTONY. Lo thee!                            [Turning from him]
  EROS. My sword is drawn.
  ANTONY. Then let it do at once
    The thing why thou hast drawn it.
  EROS. My dear master,
    My captain and my emperor, let me say,
    Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
  ANTONY. 'Tis said, man; and farewell.
  EROS. Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?
  ANTONY. Now, Eros.
  EROS. Why, there then! Thus do I escape the sorrow
    Of Antony's death.                            [Kills himself
  ANTONY. Thrice nobler than myself!
    Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
    I should, and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
    Have, by their brave instruction, got upon me
    A nobleness in record. But I will be
    A bridegroom in my death, and run into't
    As to a lover's bed. Come, then; and, Eros,
    Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus
                                          [Falling on his sword]
    I learn'd of thee. How? not dead? not dead?-
    The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!

                  Enter DERCETAS and a guard

  FIRST GUARD. What's the noise?
  ANTONY. I have done my work ill, friends. O, make an end
    Of what I have begun.
  SECOND GUARD. The star is fall'n.
  FIRST GUARD. And time is at his period.
  ALL. Alas, and woe!
  ANTONY. Let him that loves me, strike me dead.
  FIRST GUARD. Not I.
  SECOND GUARD. Nor I.
  THIRD GUARD. Nor any one.                         Exeunt guard
  DERCETAS. Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
    This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,
    Shall enter me with him.

                       Enter DIOMEDES

  DIOMEDES. Where's Antony?
  DERCETAS. There, Diomed, there.
  DIOMEDES. Lives he?
    Wilt thou not answer, man?                     Exit DERCETAS
  ANTONY. Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give me
    Sufficing strokes for death.
  DIOMEDES. Most absolute lord,
    My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
  ANTONY. When did she send thee?
  DIOMEDES. Now, my lord.
  ANTONY. Where is she?
  DIOMEDES. Lock'd in her monument. She had a prophesying fear
    Of what hath come to pass; for when she saw-
    Which never shall be found- you did suspect
    She had dispos'd with Caesar, and that your rage
    Would not be purg'd, she sent you word she was dead;
    But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
    Me to proclaim the truth; and I am come,
    I dread, too late.
  ANTONY. Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.
  DIOMEDES. What, ho! the Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
    Come, your lord calls!

             Enter four or five of the guard of ANTONY

  ANTONY. Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides;
    'Tis the last service that I shall command you.
  FIRST GUARD. Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
    All your true followers out.
  ALL. Most heavy day!
  ANTONY. Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
    To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
    Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
    Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up.
    I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends,
    And have my thanks for all.           Exeunt, hearing ANTONY
ACT_4|SC_15
                         SCENE XV.
                   Alexandria. A monument

      Enter CLEOPATRA and her maids aloft, with CHARMIAN
                         and IRAS

  CLEOPATRA. O Charmian, I will never go from hence!
  CHARMIAN. Be comforted, dear madam.
  CLEOPATRA. No, I will not.
    All strange and terrible events are welcome,
    But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow,
    Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
    As that which makes it.

                   Enter DIOMEDES, below

    How now! Is he dead?
  DIOMEDES. His death's upon him, but not dead.
    Look out o' th' other side your monument;
    His guard have brought him thither.

            Enter, below, ANTONY, borne by the guard

  CLEOPATRA. O sun,
    Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in! Darkling stand
    The varying shore o' th' world. O Antony,
    Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian; help, Iras, help;
    Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.
  ANTONY. Peace!
    Not Caesar's valour hath o'erthrown Antony,
    But Antony's hath triumph'd on itself.
  CLEOPATRA. So it should be, that none but Antony
    Should conquer Antony; but woe 'tis so!
  ANTONY. I am dying, Egypt, dying; only
    I here importune death awhile, until
    Of many thousand kisses the poor last
    I lay upon thy lips.
  CLEOPATRA. I dare not, dear.
    Dear my lord, pardon! I dare not,
    Lest I be taken. Not th' imperious show
    Of the full-fortun'd Caesar ever shall
    Be brooch'd with me. If knife, drugs, serpents, have
    Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
    Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
    And still conclusion, shall acquire no honour
    Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony-
    Help me, my women- we must draw thee up;
    Assist, good friends.
  ANTONY. O, quick, or I am gone.
  CLEOPATRA. Here's sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
    Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
    That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
    The strong-wing'd Mercury should fetch thee up,
    And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
    Wishers were ever fools. O come, come,
                          [They heave ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA]
    And welcome, welcome! Die where thou hast liv'd.
    Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
    Thus would I wear them out.
  ALL. A heavy sight!
  ANTONY. I am dying, Egypt, dying.
    Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
  CLEOPATRA. No, let me speak; and let me rail so high
    That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
    Provok'd by my offence.
  ANTONY. One word, sweet queen:
    Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety. O!
  CLEOPATRA. They do not go together.
  ANTONY. Gentle, hear me:
    None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
  CLEOPATRA. My resolution and my hands I'll trust;
    None about Caesar
  ANTONY. The miserable change now at my end
    Lament nor sorrow at; but please your thoughts
    In feeding them with those my former fortunes
    Wherein I liv'd the greatest prince o' th' world,
    The noblest; and do now not basely die,
    Not cowardly put off my helmet to
    My countryman- a Roman by a Roman
    Valiantly vanquish'd. Now my spirit is going
    I can no more.
  CLEOPATRA. Noblest of men, woo't die?
    Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
    In this dull world, which in thy absence is
    No better than a sty? O, see, my women,        [Antony dies]
    The crown o' th' earth doth melt. My lord!
    O, wither'd is the garland of the war,
    The soldier's pole is fall'n! Young boys and girls
    Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
    And there is nothing left remarkable
    Beneath the visiting moon.                          [Swoons]
  CHARMIAN. O, quietness, lady!
  IRAS. She's dead too, our sovereign.
  CHARMIAN. Lady!
  IRAS. Madam!
  CHARMIAN. O madam, madam, madam!
  IRAS. Royal Egypt, Empress!
  CHARMIAN. Peace, peace, Iras!
  CLEOPATRA. No more but e'en a woman, and commanded
    By such poor passion as the maid that milks
    And does the meanest chares. It were for me
    To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods;
    To tell them that this world did equal theirs
    Till they had stol'n our jewel. All's but nought;
    Patience is sottish, and impatience does
    Become a dog that's mad. Then is it sin
    To rush into the secret house of death
    Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
    What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian!
    My noble girls! Ah, women, women, look,
    Our lamp is spent, it's out! Good sirs, take heart.
    We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's noble,
    Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
    And make death proud to take us. Come, away;
    This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
    Ah, women, women! Come; we have no friend
    But resolution and the briefest end.
                   Exeunt; those above hearing off ANTONY'S body

ACT_5|SC_1
                       ACT V. SCENE I.
                  Alexandria. CAESAR'S camp

      Enter CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MAECENAS, GALLUS,
          PROCULEIUS, and others, his Council of War

  CAESAR. Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield;
    Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks
    The pauses that he makes.
  DOLABELLA. Caesar, I shall.                               Exit

             Enter DERCETAS With the sword of ANTONY

  CAESAR. Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'st
    Appear thus to us?
  DERCETAS. I am call'd Dercetas;
    Mark Antony I serv'd, who best was worthy
    Best to be serv'd. Whilst he stood up and spoke,
    He was my master, and I wore my life
    To spend upon his haters. If thou please
    To take me to thee, as I was to him
    I'll be to Caesar; if thou pleasest not,
    I yield thee up my life.
  CAESAR. What is't thou say'st?
  DERCETAS. I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
  CAESAR. The breaking of so great a thing should make
    A greater crack. The round world
    Should have shook lions into civil streets,
    And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
    Is not a single doom; in the name lay
    A moiety of the world.
  DERCETAS. He is dead, Caesar,
    Not by a public minister of justice,
    Nor by a hired knife; but that self hand
    Which writ his honour in the acts it did
    Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
    Splitted the heart. This is his sword;
    I robb'd his wound of it; behold it stain'd
    With his most noble blood.
  CAESAR. Look you sad, friends?
    The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
    To wash the eyes of kings.
  AGRIPPA. And strange it is
    That nature must compel us to lament
    Our most persisted deeds.
  MAECENAS. His taints and honours
    Wag'd equal with him.
  AGRIPPA. A rarer spirit never
    Did steer humanity. But you gods will give us
    Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touch'd.
  MAECENAS. When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
    He needs must see himself.
  CAESAR. O Antony,
    I have follow'd thee to this! But we do lance
    Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce
    Have shown to thee such a declining day
    Or look on thine; we could not stall together
    In the whole world. But yet let me lament,
    With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
    That thou, my brother, my competitor
    In top of all design, my mate in empire,
    Friend and companion in the front of war,
    The arm of mine own body, and the heart
    Where mine his thoughts did kindle- that our stars,
    Unreconciliable, should divide
    Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends-

                    Enter an EGYPTIAN

    But I will tell you at some meeter season.
    The business of this man looks out of him;
    We'll hear him what he says. Whence are you?
  EGYPTIAN. A poor Egyptian, yet the Queen, my mistress,
    Confin'd in all she has, her monument,
    Of thy intents desires instruction,
    That she preparedly may frame herself
    To th' way she's forc'd to.
  CAESAR. Bid her have good heart.
    She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
    How honourable and how kindly we
    Determine for her; for Caesar cannot learn
    To be ungentle.
  EGYPTIAN. So the gods preserve thee!                      Exit
  CAESAR. Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
    We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts
    The quality of her passion shall require,
    Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
    She do defeat us; for her life in Rome
    Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,
    And with your speediest bring us what she says,
    And how you find her.
  PROCULEIUS. Caesar, I shall.                              Exit
  CAESAR. Gallus, go you along.                      Exit GALLUS
    Where's Dolabella, to second Proculeius?
  ALL. Dolabella!
  CAESAR. Let him alone, for I remember now
    How he's employ'd; he shall in time be ready.
    Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
    How hardly I was drawn into this war,
    How calm and gentle I proceeded still
    In all my writings. Go with me, and see
    What I can show in this.                              Exeunt

ACT_5|SC_2
                         SCENE II.
                Alexandria. The monument

      Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN

  CLEOPATRA. My desolation does begin to make
    A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar:
    Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
    A minister of her will; and it is great
    To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
    Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
    Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
    The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.

       Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS,
                          and soldiers

  PROCULEIUS. Caesar sends greetings to the Queen of Egypt,
    And bids thee study on what fair demands
    Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.
  CLEOPATRA. What's thy name?
  PROCULEIUS. My name is Proculeius.
  CLEOPATRA. Antony
    Did tell me of you, bade me trust you; but
    I do not greatly care to be deceiv'd,
    That have no use for trusting. If your master
    Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
    That majesty, to keep decorum, must
    No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
    To give me conquer'd Egypt for my son,
    He gives me so much of mine own as I
    Will kneel to him with thanks.
  PROCULEIUS. Be of good cheer;
    Y'are fall'n into a princely hand; fear nothing.
    Make your full reference freely to my lord,
    Who is so full of grace that it flows over
    On all that need. Let me report to him
    Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
    A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness
    Where he for grace is kneel'd to.
  CLEOPATRA. Pray you tell him
    I am his fortune's vassal and I send him
    The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
    A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
    Look him i' th' face.
  PROCULEIUS. This I'll report, dear lady.
    Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
    Of him that caus'd it.
  GALLUS. You see how easily she may be surpris'd.

      Here PROCULEIUS and two of the guard ascend the
       monument by a ladder placed against a window,
       and come behind CLEOPATRA. Some of the guard
                unbar and open the gates

    Guard her till Caesar come.                             Exit
  IRAS. Royal Queen!
  CHARMIAN. O Cleopatra! thou art taken, Queen!
  CLEOPATRA. Quick, quick, good hands.        [Drawing a dagger]
  PROCULEIUS. Hold, worthy lady, hold,             [Disarms her]
    Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
    Reliev'd, but not betray'd.
  CLEOPATRA. What, of death too,
    That rids our dogs of languish?
  PROCULEIUS. Cleopatra,
    Do not abuse my master's bounty by
    Th' undoing of yourself. Let the world see
    His nobleness well acted, which your death
    Will never let come forth.
  CLEOPATRA. Where art thou, death?
    Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
    Worth many babes and beggars!
  PROCULEIUS. O, temperance, lady!
  CLEOPATRA. Sir, I will eat no meat; I'll not drink, sir;
    If idle talk will once be necessary,
    I'll not sleep neither. This mortal house I'll ruin,
    Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
    Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court,
    Nor once be chastis'd with the sober eye
    Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up,
    And show me to the shouting varletry
    Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
    Be gentle grave unto me! Rather on Nilus' mud
    Lay me stark-nak'd, and let the water-flies
    Blow me into abhorring! Rather make
    My country's high pyramides my gibbet,
    And hang me up in chains!
  PROCULEIUS. You do extend
    These thoughts of horror further than you shall
    Find cause in Caesar.

                      Enter DOLABELLA

  DOLABELLA. Proculeius,
    What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
    And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen,
    I'll take her to my guard.
  PROCULEIUS. So, Dolabella,
    It shall content me best. Be gentle to her.
    [To CLEOPATRA] To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
    If you'll employ me to him.
  CLEOPATRA. Say I would die.
                                  Exeunt PROCULEIUS and soldiers
  DOLABELLA. Most noble Empress, you have heard of me?
  CLEOPATRA. I cannot tell.
  DOLABELLA. Assuredly you know me.
  CLEOPATRA. No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
    You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
    Is't not your trick?
  DOLABELLA. I understand not, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. I dreamt there was an Emperor Antony-
    O, such another sleep, that I might see
    But such another man!
  DOLABELLA. If it might please ye-
  CLEOPATRA. His face was as the heav'ns, and therein stuck
    A sun and moon, which kept their course and lighted
    The little O, the earth.
  DOLABELLA. Most sovereign creature-
  CLEOPATRA. His legs bestrid the ocean; his rear'd arm
    Crested the world. His voice was propertied
    As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
    But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
    He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
    There was no winter in't; an autumn 'twas
    That grew the more by reaping. His delights
    Were dolphin-like: they show'd his back above
    The element they liv'd in. In his livery
    Walk'd crowns and crownets; realms and islands were
    As plates dropp'd from his pocket.
  DOLABELLA. Cleopatra-
  CLEOPATRA. Think you there was or might be such a man
    As this I dreamt of?
  DOLABELLA. Gentle madam, no.
  CLEOPATRA. You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
    But if there be nor ever were one such,
    It's past the size of drearning. Nature wants stuff
    To vie strange forms with fancy; yet t' imagine
    An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
    Condemning shadows quite.
  DOLABELLA. Hear me, good madam.
    Your loss is, as yourself, great; and you bear it
    As answering to the weight. Would I might never
    O'ertake pursu'd success, but I do feel,
    By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
    My very heart at root.
  CLEOPATRA. I thank you, sir.
    Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
  DOLABELLA. I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, pray you, sir.
  DOLABELLA. Though he be honourable-
  CLEOPATRA. He'll lead me, then, in triumph?
  DOLABELLA. Madam, he will. I know't.                [Flourish]
                              [Within: 'Make way there-Caesar!']

       Enter CAESAR; GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, MAECENAS, SELEUCUS,
                     and others of his train

  CAESAR. Which is the Queen of Egypt?
  DOLABELLA. It is the Emperor, madam.        [CLEOPATPA kneels]
  CAESAR. Arise, you shall not kneel.
    I pray you, rise; rise, Egypt.
  CLEOPATRA. Sir, the gods
    Will have it thus; my master and my lord
    I must obey.
  CAESAR. Take to you no hard thoughts.
    The record of what injuries you did us,
    Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
    As things but done by chance.
  CLEOPATRA. Sole sir o' th' world,
    I cannot project mine own cause so well
    To make it clear, but do confess I have
    Been laden with like frailties which before
    Have often sham'd our sex.
  CAESAR. Cleopatra, know
    We will extenuate rather than enforce.
    If you apply yourself to our intents-
    Which towards you are most gentle- you shall find
    A benefit in this change; but if you seek
    To lay on me a cruelty by taking
    Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
    Of my good purposes, and put your children
    To that destruction which I'll guard them from,
    If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.
  CLEOPATRA. And may, through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
    Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
    Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
  CAESAR. You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
  CLEOPATRA. This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
    I am possess'd of. 'Tis exactly valued,
    Not petty things admitted. Where's Seleucus?
  SELEUCUS. Here, madam.
  CLEOPATRA. This is my treasurer; let him speak, my lord,
    Upon his peril, that I have reserv'd
    To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.
  SELEUCUS. Madam,
    I had rather seal my lips than to my peril
    Speak that which is not.
  CLEOPATRA. What have I kept back?
  SELEUCUS. Enough to purchase what you have made known.
  CAESAR. Nay, blush not, Cleopatra; I approve
    Your wisdom in the deed.
  CLEOPATRA. See, Caesar! O, behold,
    How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours;
    And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
    The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
    Even make me wild. O slave, of no more trust
    Than love that's hir'd! What, goest thou back? Thou shalt
    Go back, I warrant thee; but I'll catch thine eyes
    Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
    O rarely base!
  CAESAR. Good Queen, let us entreat you.
  CLEOPATRA. O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
    That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
    Doing the honour of thy lordliness
    To one so meek, that mine own servant should
    Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
    Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
    That I some lady trifles have reserv'd,
    Immoment toys, things of such dignity
    As we greet modern friends withal; and say
    Some nobler token I have kept apart
    For Livia and Octavia, to induce
    Their mediation- must I be unfolded
    With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
    Beneath the fall I have. [To SELEUCUS] Prithee go hence;
    Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
    Through th' ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
    Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
  CAESAR. Forbear, Seleucus.                       Exit SELEUCUS
  CLEOPATRA. Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
    For things that others do; and when we fall
    We answer others' merits in our name,
    Are therefore to be pitied.
  CAESAR. Cleopatra,
    Not what you have reserv'd, nor what acknowledg'd,
    Put we i' th' roll of conquest. Still be't yours,
    Bestow it at your pleasure; and believe
    Caesar's no merchant, to make prize with you
    Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheer'd;
    Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear Queen;
    For we intend so to dispose you as
    Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.
    Our care and pity is so much upon you
    That we remain your friend; and so, adieu.
  CLEOPATRA. My master and my lord!
  CAESAR. Not so. Adieu.
                           Flourish. Exeunt CAESAR and his train
  CLEOPATRA. He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
    Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian!
                                             [Whispers CHARMIAN]
  IRAS. Finish, good lady; the bright day is done,
    And we are for the dark.
  CLEOPATRA. Hie thee again.
    I have spoke already, and it is provided;
    Go put it to the haste.
  CHARMIAN. Madam, I will.

                      Re-enter DOLABELLA

  DOLABELLA. Where's the Queen?
  CHARMIAN. Behold, sir.                                    Exit
  CLEOPATRA. Dolabella!
  DOLABELLA. Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
    Which my love makes religion to obey,
    I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
    Intends his journey, and within three days
    You with your children will he send before.
    Make your best use of this; I have perform'd
    Your pleasure and my promise.
  CLEOPATRA. Dolabella,
    I shall remain your debtor.
  DOLABELLA. I your servant.
    Adieu, good Queen; I must attend on Caesar.
  CLEOPATRA. Farewell, and thanks.                Exit DOLABELLA
    Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
    Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
    In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves,
    With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall
    Uplift us to the view; in their thick breaths,
    Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded,
    And forc'd to drink their vapour.
  IRAS. The gods forbid!
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
    Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
    Ballad us out o' tune; the quick comedians
    Extemporally will stage us, and present
    Our Alexandrian revels; Antony
    Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
    Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
    I' th' posture of a whore.
  IRAS. O the good gods!
  CLEOPATRA. Nay, that's certain.
  IRAS. I'll never see't, for I am sure mine nails
    Are stronger than mine eyes.
  CLEOPATRA. Why, that's the way
    To fool their preparation and to conquer
    Their most absurd intents.

                      Enter CHARMIAN

    Now, Charmian!
    Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
    My best attires. I am again for Cydnus,
    To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah, Iras, go.
    Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed;
    And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave
    To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.
                                       Exit IRAS. A noise within
    Wherefore's this noise?

                     Enter a GUARDSMAN

  GUARDSMAN. Here is a rural fellow
    That will not be denied your Highness' presence.
    He brings you figs.
  CLEOPATRA. Let him come in.                     Exit GUARDSMAN
    What poor an instrument
    May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
    My resolution's plac'd, and I have nothing
    Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
    I am marble-constant; now the fleeting moon
    No planet is of mine.

          Re-enter GUARDSMAN and CLOWN, with a basket

  GUARDSMAN. This is the man.
  CLEOPATRA. Avoid, and leave him.                Exit GUARDSMAN
    Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
    That kills and pains not?
  CLOWN. Truly, I have him. But I would not be the party that should
    desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal; those that
    do die of it do seldom or never recover.
  CLEOPATRA. Remember'st thou any that have died on't?
  CLOWN. Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no
    longer than yesterday: a very honest woman, but something given
    to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty; how
    she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt- truly she makes
    a very good report o' th' worm. But he that will believe all that
    they say shall never be saved by half that they do. But this is
    most falliable, the worm's an odd worm.
  CLEOPATRA. Get thee hence; farewell.
  CLOWN. I wish you all joy of the worm.
                                          [Sets down the basket]
  CLEOPATRA. Farewell.
  CLOWN. You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his
    kind.
  CLEOPATRA. Ay, ay; farewell.
  CLOWN. Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping
    of wise people; for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.
  CLEOPATRA. Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.
  CLOWN. Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is not worth
    the feeding.
  CLEOPATRA. Will it eat me?
  CLOWN. You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil
    himself will not eat a woman. I know that a woman is a dish for
    the gods, if the devil dress her not. But truly, these same
    whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in
    every ten that they make the devils mar five.
  CLEOPATRA. Well, get thee gone; farewell.
  CLOWN. Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o' th' worm.         Exit

             Re-enter IRAS, with a robe, crown, &c.

  CLEOPATRA. Give me my robe, put on my crown; I have
    Immortal longings in me. Now no more
    The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
    Yare, yare, good Iras; quick. Methinks I hear
    Antony call. I see him rouse himself
    To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
    The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
    To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come.
    Now to that name my courage prove my title!
    I am fire and air; my other elements
    I give to baser life. So, have you done?
    Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
    Farewell, kind Charmian. Iras, long farewell.
                              [Kisses them. IRAS falls and dies]
    Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
    If thus thou and nature can so gently part,
    The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
    Which hurts and is desir'd. Dost thou lie still?
    If thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
    It is not worth leave-taking.
  CHARMIAN. Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
    The gods themselves do weep.
  CLEOPATRA. This proves me base.
    If she first meet the curled Antony,
    He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
    Which is my heaven to have. Come, thou mortal wretch,
                    [To an asp, which she applies to her breast]
    With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
    Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
    Be angry and dispatch. O couldst thou speak,
    That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
    Unpolicied!
  CHARMIAN. O Eastern star!
  CLEOPATRA. Peace, peace!
    Dost thou not see my baby at my breast
    That sucks the nurse asleep?
  CHARMIAN. O, break! O, break!
  CLEOPATRA. As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle-
    O Antony! Nay, I will take thee too:
                               [Applying another asp to her arm]
    What should I stay-                                   [Dies]
  CHARMIAN. In this vile world? So, fare thee well.
    Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
    A lass unparallel'd. Downy windows, close;
    And golden Phoebus never be beheld
    Of eyes again so royal! Your crown's awry;
    I'll mend it and then play-

                  Enter the guard, rushing in

  FIRST GUARD. Where's the Queen?
  CHARMIAN. Speak softly, wake her not.
  FIRST GUARD. Caesar hath sent-
  CHARMIAN. Too slow a messenger.               [Applies an asp]
    O, come apace, dispatch. I partly feel thee.
  FIRST GUARD. Approach, ho! All's not well: Caesar's beguil'd.
  SECOND GUARD. There's Dolabella sent from Caesar; call him.
  FIRST GUARD. What work is here! Charmian, is this well done?
  CHARMIAN. It is well done, and fitting for a princes
    Descended of so many royal kings.
    Ah, soldier!                                 [CHARMIAN dies]

                      Re-enter DOLABELLA

  DOLABELLA. How goes it here?
  SECOND GUARD. All dead.
  DOLABELLA. Caesar, thy thoughts
    Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
    To see perform'd the dreaded act which thou
    So sought'st to hinder.
                      [Within: 'A way there, a way for Caesar!']

              Re-enter CAESAR and all his train

  DOLABELLA. O sir, you are too sure an augurer:
    That you did fear is done.
  CAESAR. Bravest at the last,
    She levell'd at our purposes, and being royal,
    Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
    I do not see them bleed.
  DOLABELLA. Who was last with them?
  FIRST GUARD. A simple countryman that brought her figs.
    This was his basket.
  CAESAR. Poison'd then.
  FIRST GUARD. O Caesar,
    This Charmian liv'd but now; she stood and spake.
    I found her trimming up the diadem
    On her dead mistress. Tremblingly she stood,
    And on the sudden dropp'd.
  CAESAR. O noble weakness!
    If they had swallow'd poison 'twould appear
    By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,
    As she would catch another Antony
    In her strong toil of grace.
  DOLABELLA. Here on her breast
    There is a vent of blood, and something blown;
    The like is on her arm.
  FIRST GUARD. This is an aspic's trail; and these fig-leaves
    Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves
    Upon the caves of Nile.
  CAESAR. Most probable
    That so she died; for her physician tells me
    She hath pursu'd conclusions infinite
    Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
    And bear her women from the monument.
    She shall be buried by her Antony;
    No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
    A pair so famous. High events as these
    Strike those that make them; and their story is
    No less in pity than his glory which
    Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
    In solemn show attend this funeral,
    And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
    High order in this great solemnity.                   Exeunt





AS YOU LIKE IT

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

  DUKE, living in exile
  FREDERICK, his brother, and usurper of his dominions
  AMIENS, lord attending on the banished Duke
  JAQUES,   "      "       "  "     "      "
  LE BEAU, a courtier attending upon Frederick
  CHARLES, wrestler to Frederick
  OLIVER, son of Sir Rowland de Boys
  JAQUES,   "   "  "    "     "  "
  ORLANDO,  "   "  "    "     "  "
  ADAM,   servant to Oliver
  DENNIS,     "     "   "
  TOUCHSTONE, the court jester
  SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a vicar
  CORIN,    shepherd
  SILVIUS,     "
  WILLIAM, a country fellow, in love with Audrey
  A person representing HYMEN

  ROSALIND, daughter to the banished Duke
  CELIA, daughter to Frederick
  PHEBE, a shepherdes
  AUDREY, a country wench

  Lords, Pages, Foresters, and Attendants

SCENE: OLIVER'S house; FREDERICK'S court; and the Forest of Arden

ACT I. SCENE I. Orchard of OLIVER'S house

Enter ORLANDO and ADAM

  ORLANDO. As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me
  by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou say'st, charged my
  brother, on his blessing, to breed me well; and there begins my
  sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks
  goldenly of his profit. For my part, he keeps me rustically at home,
  or, to speak more properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call
  you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth that differs not from
  the stalling of an ox? His horses are bred better; for, besides that
  they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage, and
  to that end riders dearly hir'd; but I, his brother, gain nothing
  under him but growth; for the which his animals on his dunghills are
  as much bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so
  plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me his
  countenance seems to take from me. He lets me feed with his hinds,
  bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my
  gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me; and
  the spirit of my father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny
  against this servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know
  no wise remedy how to avoid it.

                           Enter OLIVER

  ADAM. Yonder comes my master, your brother.
  ORLANDO. Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me
    up.                                           [ADAM retires]
  OLIVER. Now, sir! what make you here?
  ORLANDO. Nothing; I am not taught to make any thing.
  OLIVER. What mar you then, sir?
  ORLANDO. Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a
    poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
  OLIVER. Marry, sir, be better employed, and be nought awhile.
  ORLANDO. Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? What
    prodigal portion have I spent that I should come to such penury?
  OLIVER. Know you where you are, sir?
  ORLANDO. O, sir, very well; here in your orchard.
  OLIVER. Know you before whom, sir?
  ORLANDO. Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I know you are
    my eldest brother; and in the gentle condition of blood, you
    should so know me. The courtesy of nations allows you my better
    in that you are the first-born; but the same tradition takes not
    away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. I have as
    much of my father in me as you, albeit I confess your coming
    before me is nearer to his reverence.
  OLIVER. What, boy!                               [Strikes him]
  ORLANDO. Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.
  OLIVER. Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
  ORLANDO. I am no villain; I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
    Boys. He was my father; and he is thrice a villain that says such
    a father begot villains. Wert thou not my brother, I would not
    take this hand from thy throat till this other had pull'd out thy
    tongue for saying so. Thou has rail'd on thyself.
  ADAM. [Coming forward] Sweet masters, be patient; for your father's
    remembrance, be at accord.
  OLIVER. Let me go, I say.
  ORLANDO. I will not, till I please; you shall hear me. My father
    charg'd you in his will to give me good education: you have
    train'd me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all
    gentleman-like qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
    me, and I will no longer endure it; therefore allow me such
    exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor
    allottery my father left me by testament; with that I will go buy
    my fortunes.
  OLIVER. And what wilt thou do? Beg, when that is spent? Well, sir,
    get you in. I will not long be troubled with you; you shall have
    some part of your will. I pray you leave me.
  ORLANDO. I no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
  OLIVER. Get you with him, you old dog.
  ADAM. Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in
    your service. God be with my old master! He would not have spoke
    such a word.
                                         Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM
  OLIVER. Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I will physic
    your rankness, and yet give no thousand crowns neither. Holla,
    Dennis!

                          Enter DENNIS

  DENNIS. Calls your worship?
  OLIVER. not Charles, the Duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
  DENNIS. So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access
    to you.
  OLIVER. Call him in. [Exit DENNIS] 'Twill be a good way; and
    to-morrow the wrestling is.

                          Enter CHARLES

  CHARLES. Good morrow to your worship.
  OLIVER. Good Monsieur Charles! What's the new news at the new
    court?
  CHARLES. There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news; that
    is, the old Duke is banished by his younger brother the new Duke;
    and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
    exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new Duke;
    therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
  OLIVER. Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter, be banished
    with her father?
  CHARLES. O, no; for the Duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves her,
    being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have
    followed her exile, or have died to stay behind her. She is at
    the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own
    daughter; and never two ladies loved as they do.
  OLIVER. Where will the old Duke live?
  CHARLES. They say he is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many
    merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood
    of England. They say many young gentlemen flock to him every day,
    and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
  OLIVER. What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new Duke?
  CHARLES. Marry, do I, sir; and I came to acquaint you with a
    matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand that your younger
    brother, Orlando, hath a disposition to come in disguis'd against
    me to try a fall. To-morrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit; and he
    that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well.
    Your brother is but young and tender; and, for your love, I would
    be loath to foil him, as I must, for my own honour, if he come
    in; therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint
    you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment,
    or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is
    thing of his own search and altogether against my will.
  OLIVER. Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt
    find I will most kindly requite. I had myself notice of my
    brother's purpose herein, and have by underhand means laboured to
    dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee,
    Charles, it is the stubbornest young fellow of France; full of
    ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret
    and villainous contriver against me his natural brother.
    Therefore use thy discretion: I had as lief thou didst break his
    neck as his finger. And thou wert best look to't; for if thou
    dost him any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace
    himself on thee, he will practise against thee by poison, entrap
    thee by some treacherous device, and never leave thee till he
    hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other; for, I
    assure thee, and almost with tears I speak it, there is not one
    so young and so villainous this day living. I speak but brotherly
    of him; but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush
    and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.
  CHARLES. I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
    to-morrow I'll give him his payment. If ever he go alone again,
    I'll never wrestle for prize more. And so, God keep your worship!
 Exit
  OLIVER. Farewell, good Charles. Now will I stir this gamester. I
    hope I shall see an end of him; for my soul, yet I know not why,
    hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle; never school'd and
    yet learned; full of noble device; of all sorts enchantingly
    beloved; and, indeed, so much in the heart of the world, and
    especially of my own people, who best know him, that I am
    altogether misprised. But it shall not be so long; this wrestler
    shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the boy
    thither, which now I'll go about.                       Exit

SCENE II. A lawn before the DUKE'S palace

Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

  CELIA. I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
  ROSALIND. Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistress of; and
    would you yet I were merrier? Unless you could teach me to forget
    a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any
    extraordinary pleasure.
  CELIA. Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that I
    love thee. If my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy
    uncle, the Duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, I
    could have taught my love to take thy father for mine; so wouldst
    thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously temper'd
    as mine is to thee.
  ROSALIND. Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to
    rejoice in yours.
  CELIA. You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is like to
    have; and, truly, when he dies thou shalt be his heir; for what
    he hath taken away from thy father perforce, I will render thee
    again in affection. By mine honour, I will; and when I break that
    oath, let me turn monster; therefore, my sweet Rose, my dear
    Rose, be merry.
  ROSALIND. From henceforth I will, coz, and devise sports.
    Let me see; what think you of falling in love?
  CELIA. Marry, I prithee, do, to make sport withal; but love no man
    in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety
    of a pure blush thou mayst in honour come off again.
  ROSALIND. What shall be our sport, then?
  CELIA. Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her
    wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
  ROSALIND. I would we could do so; for her benefits are mightily
    misplaced; and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her
    gifts to women.
  CELIA. 'Tis true; for those that she makes fair she scarce makes
    honest; and those that she makes honest she makes very
    ill-favouredly.
  ROSALIND. Nay; now thou goest from Fortune's office to Nature's:
    Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of
    Nature.

                         Enter TOUCHSTONE

  CELIA. No; when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by
    Fortune fall into the fire? Though Nature hath given us wit to
    flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off
    the argument?
  ROSALIND. Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature, when
    Fortune makes Nature's natural the cutter-off of Nature's wit.
  CELIA. Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
    Nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of
    such goddesses, and hath sent this natural for our whetstone; for
    always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. How
    now, wit! Whither wander you?
  TOUCHSTONE. Mistress, you must come away to your father.
  CELIA. Were you made the messenger?
  TOUCHSTONE. No, by mine honour; but I was bid to come for you.
  ROSALIND. Where learned you that oath, fool?
  TOUCHSTONE. Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were
    good pancakes, and swore by his honour the mustard was naught.
    Now I'll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard
    was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.
  CELIA. How prove you that, in the great heap of your knowledge?
  ROSALIND. Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
  TOUCHSTONE. Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear
    by your beards that I am a knave.
  CELIA. By our beards, if we had them, thou art.
  TOUCHSTONE. By my knavery, if I had it, then I were. But if you
    swear by that that not, you are not forsworn; no more was this
    knight, swearing by his honour, for he never had any; or if he
    had, he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancackes or
    that mustard.
  CELIA. Prithee, who is't that thou mean'st?
  TOUCHSTONE. One that old Frederick, your father, loves.
  CELIA. My father's love is enough to honour him. Enough, speak no
    more of him; you'll be whipt for taxation one of these days.
  TOUCHSTONE. The more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise
    men do foolishly.
  CELIA. By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the little wit that
    fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have
    makes a great show. Here comes Monsieur Le Beau.

                           Enter LE BEAU

  ROSALIND. With his mouth full of news.
  CELIA. Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.
  ROSALIND. Then shall we be news-cramm'd.
  CELIA. All the better; we shall be the more marketable. Bon jour,
    Monsieur Le Beau. What's the news?
  LE BEAU. Fair Princess, you have lost much good sport.
  CELIA. Sport! of what colour?
  LE BEAU. What colour, madam? How shall I answer you?
  ROSALIND. As wit and fortune will.
  TOUCHSTONE. Or as the Destinies decrees.
  CELIA. Well said; that was laid on with a trowel.
  TOUCHSTONE. Nay, if I keep not my rank-
  ROSALIND. Thou losest thy old smell.
  LE BEAU. You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of good
    wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
  ROSALIND. Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.
  LE BEAU. I will tell you the beginning, and, if it please your
    ladyships, you may see the end; for the best is yet to do; and
    here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.
  CELIA. Well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
  LE BEAU. There comes an old man and his three sons-
  CELIA. I could match this beginning with an old tale.
  LE BEAU. Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
  ROSALIND. With bills on their necks: 'Be it known unto all men by
    these presents'-
  LE BEAU. The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles, the Duke's
    wrestler; which Charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of
    his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. So he serv'd
    the second, and so the third. Yonder they lie; the poor old man,
    their father, making such pitiful dole over them that all the
    beholders take his part with weeping.
  ROSALIND. Alas!
  TOUCHSTONE. But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have
    lost?
  LE BEAU. Why, this that I speak of.
  TOUCHSTONE. Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time
    that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.
  CELIA. Or I, I promise thee.
  ROSALIND. But is there any else longs to see this broken music in
    his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we
    see this wrestling, cousin?
  LE BEAU. You must, if you stay here; for here is the place
    appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
  CELIA. Yonder, sure, they are coming. Let us now stay and see it.

           Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, LORDS, ORLANDO,
                     CHARLES, and ATTENDANTS

  FREDERICK. Come on; since the youth will not be entreated, his own
    peril on his forwardness.
  ROSALIND. Is yonder the man?
  LE BEAU. Even he, madam.
  CELIA. Alas, he is too young; yet he looks successfully.
  FREDERICK. How now, daughter and cousin! Are you crept hither to
    see the wrestling?
  ROSALIND. Ay, my liege; so please you give us leave.
  FREDERICK. You will take little delight in it, I can tell you,
    there is such odds in the man. In pity of the challenger's youth
    I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. Speak to
    him, ladies; see if you can move him.
  CELIA. Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.
  FREDERICK. Do so; I'll not be by.
                                     [DUKE FREDERICK goes apart]
  LE BEAU. Monsieur the Challenger, the Princess calls for you.
  ORLANDO. I attend them with all respect and duty.
  ROSALIND. Young man, have you challeng'd Charles the wrestler?
  ORLANDO. No, fair Princess; he is the general challenger. I come
    but in, as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
  CELIA. Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years.
    You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength; if you saw
    yourself with your eyes, or knew yourself with your judgment, the
    fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal
    enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to embrace your own
    safety and give over this attempt.
  ROSALIND. Do, young sir; your reputation shall not therefore be
    misprised: we will make it our suit to the Duke that the
    wrestling might not go forward.
  ORLANDO. I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts,
    wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent
    ladies any thing. But let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go
    with me to my trial; wherein if I be foil'd there is but one
    sham'd that was never gracious; if kill'd, but one dead that is
    willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none
    to lament me; the world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only
    in the world I fill up a place, which may be better supplied when
    I have made it empty.
  ROSALIND. The little strength that I have, I would it were with
    you.
  CELIA. And mine to eke out hers.
  ROSALIND. Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceiv'd in you!
  CELIA. Your heart's desires be with you!
  CHARLES. Come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to
    lie with his mother earth?
  ORLANDO. Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.
  FREDERICK. You shall try but one fall.
  CHARLES. No, I warrant your Grace, you shall not entreat him to a
    second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
  ORLANDO. You mean to mock me after; you should not have mock'd me
    before; but come your ways.
  ROSALIND. Now, Hercules be thy speed, young man!
  CELIA. I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the
    leg.                                          [They wrestle]
  ROSALIND. O excellent young man!
  CELIA. If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should
    down.
                                      [CHARLES is thrown. Shout]
  FREDERICK. No more, no more.
  ORLANDO. Yes, I beseech your Grace; I am not yet well breath'd.
  FREDERICK. How dost thou, Charles?
  LE BEAU. He cannot speak, my lord.
  FREDERICK. Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?
  ORLANDO. Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de
    Boys.
  FREDERICK. I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
    The world esteem'd thy father honourable,
    But I did find him still mine enemy.
    Thou shouldst have better pleas'd me with this deed,
    Hadst thou descended from another house.
    But fare thee well; thou art a gallant youth;
    I would thou hadst told me of another father.
                                 Exeunt DUKE, train, and LE BEAU
  CELIA. Were I my father, coz, would I do this?
  ORLANDO. I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
    His youngest son- and would not change that calling
    To be adopted heir to Frederick.
  ROSALIND. My father lov'd Sir Rowland as his soul,
    And all the world was of my father's mind;
    Had I before known this young man his son,
    I should have given him tears unto entreaties
    Ere he should thus have ventur'd.
  CELIA. Gentle cousin,
    Let us go thank him, and encourage him;
    My father's rough and envious disposition
    Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have well deserv'd;
    If you do keep your promises in love
    But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
    Your mistress shall be happy.
  ROSALIND. Gentleman,        [Giving him a chain from her neck]
    Wear this for me; one out of suits with fortune,
    That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
    Shall we go, coz?
  CELIA. Ay. Fare you well, fair gentleman.
  ORLANDO. Can I not say 'I thank you'? My better parts
    Are all thrown down; and that which here stands up
    Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
  ROSALIND. He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes;
    I'll ask him what he would. Did you call, sir?
    Sir, you have wrestled well, and overthrown
    More than your enemies.
  CELIA. Will you go, coz?
  ROSALIND. Have with you. Fare you well.
                                       Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
  ORLANDO. What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
    I cannot speak to her, yet she urg'd conference.
    O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown!
    Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

                      Re-enter LE BEAU

  LE BEAU. Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
    To leave this place. Albeit you have deserv'd
    High commendation, true applause, and love,
    Yet such is now the Duke's condition
    That he misconstrues all that you have done.
    The Duke is humorous; what he is, indeed,
    More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.
  ORLANDO. I thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this:
    Which of the two was daughter of the Duke
    That here was at the wrestling?
  LE BEAU. Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners;
    But yet, indeed, the smaller is his daughter;
    The other is daughter to the banish'd Duke,
    And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
    To keep his daughter company; whose loves
    Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
    But I can tell you that of late this Duke
    Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
    Grounded upon no other argument
    But that the people praise her for her virtues
    And pity her for her good father's sake;
    And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
    Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
    Hereafter, in a better world than this,
    I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
  ORLANDO. I rest much bounden to you; fare you well.
                                                    Exit LE BEAU
    Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;
    From tyrant Duke unto a tyrant brother.
    But heavenly Rosalind!                                  Exit

SCENE III. The DUKE's palace

Enter CELIA and ROSALIND

  CELIA. Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy!
    Not a word?
  ROSALIND. Not one to throw at a dog.
  CELIA. No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs;
    throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.
  ROSALIND. Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should
    be lam'd with reasons and the other mad without any.
  CELIA. But is all this for your father?
  ROSALIND. No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how full of
    briers is this working-day world!
  CELIA. They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday
    foolery; if we walk not in the trodden paths, our very petticoats
    will catch them.
  ROSALIND. I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my
    heart.
  CELIA. Hem them away.
  ROSALIND. I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.
  CELIA. Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
  ROSALIND. O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.
  CELIA. O, a good wish upon you! You will try in time, in despite of
    a fall. But, turning these jests out of service, let us talk in
    good earnest. Is it possible, on such a sudden, you should fall
    into so strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?
  ROSALIND. The Duke my father lov'd his father dearly.
  CELIA. Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly?
    By this kind of chase I should hate him, for my father hated his
    father dearly; yet I hate not Orlando.
  ROSALIND. No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
  CELIA. Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

                    Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with LORDS

  ROSALIND. Let me love him for that; and do you love him because I
    do. Look, here comes the Duke.
  CELIA. With his eyes full of anger.
  FREDERICK. Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
    And get you from our court.
  ROSALIND. Me, uncle?
  FREDERICK. You, cousin.
    Within these ten days if that thou beest found
    So near our public court as twenty miles,
    Thou diest for it.
  ROSALIND. I do beseech your Grace,
    Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
    If with myself I hold intelligence,
    Or have acquaintance with mine own desires;
    If that I do not dream, or be not frantic-
    As I do trust I am not- then, dear uncle,
    Never so much as in a thought unborn
    Did I offend your Highness.
  FREDERICK. Thus do all traitors;
    If their purgation did consist in words,
    They are as innocent as grace itself.
    Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
  ROSALIND. Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
    Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
  FREDERICK. Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.
  ROSALIND. SO was I when your Highness took his dukedom;
    So was I when your Highness banish'd him.
    Treason is not inherited, my lord;
    Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
    What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
    Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
    To think my poverty is treacherous.
  CELIA. Dear sovereign, hear me speak.
  FREDERICK. Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,
    Else had she with her father rang'd along.
  CELIA. I did not then entreat to have her stay;
    It was your pleasure, and your own remorse;
    I was too young that time to value her,
    But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
    Why so am I: we still have slept together,
    Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together;
    And wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans,
    Still we went coupled and inseparable.
  FREDERICK. She is too subtle for thee; and her smoothness,
    Her very silence and her patience,
    Speak to the people, and they pity her.
    Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name;
    And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous
    When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
    Firm and irrevocable is my doom
    Which I have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.
  CELIA. Pronounce that sentence, then, on me, my liege;
    I cannot live out of her company.
  FREDERICK. You are a fool. You, niece, provide yourself.
    If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
    And in the greatness of my word, you die.
                                           Exeunt DUKE and LORDS
  CELIA. O my poor Rosalind! Whither wilt thou go?
    Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
    I charge thee be not thou more griev'd than I am.
  ROSALIND. I have more cause.
  CELIA. Thou hast not, cousin.
    Prithee be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
    Hath banish'd me, his daughter?
  ROSALIND. That he hath not.
  CELIA. No, hath not? Rosalind lacks, then, the love
    Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
    Shall we be sund'red? Shall we part, sweet girl?
    No; let my father seek another heir.
    Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
    Whither to go, and what to bear with us;
    And do not seek to take your charge upon you,
    To bear your griefs yourself, and leave me out;
    For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
    Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.
  ROSALIND. Why, whither shall we go?
  CELIA. To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.
  ROSALIND. Alas, what danger will it be to us,
    Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
    Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
  CELIA. I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
    And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
    The like do you; so shall we pass along,
    And never stir assailants.
  ROSALIND. Were it not better,
    Because that I am more than common tall,
    That I did suit me all points like a man?
    A gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
    A boar spear in my hand; and- in my heart
    Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will-
    We'll have a swashing and a martial outside,
    As many other mannish cowards have
    That do outface it with their semblances.
  CELIA. What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
  ROSALIND. I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
    And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
    But what will you be call'd?
  CELIA. Something that hath a reference to my state:
    No longer Celia, but Aliena.
  ROSALIND. But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal
    The clownish fool out of your father's court?
    Would he not be a comfort to our travel?
  CELIA. He'll go along o'er the wide world with me;
    Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away,
    And get our jewels and our wealth together;
    Devise the fittest time and safest way
    To hide us from pursuit that will be made
    After my flight. Now go we in content
    To liberty, and not to banishment.                    Exeunt

ACT II. SCENE I. The Forest of Arden

Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or three LORDS, like foresters

  DUKE SENIOR. Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
    Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
    Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
    More free from peril than the envious court?
    Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
    The seasons' difference; as the icy fang
    And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
    Which when it bites and blows upon my body,
    Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
    'This is no flattery; these are counsellors
    That feelingly persuade me what I am.'
    Sweet are the uses of adversity,
    Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
    Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
    And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
    Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
    Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
    I would not change it.
  AMIENS. Happy is your Grace,
    That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
    Into so quiet and so sweet a style.
  DUKE SENIOR. Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
    And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
    Being native burghers of this desert city,
    Should, in their own confines, with forked heads
    Have their round haunches gor'd.
  FIRST LORD. Indeed, my lord,
    The melancholy Jaques grieves at that;
    And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
    Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
    To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
    Did steal behind him as he lay along
    Under an oak whose antique root peeps out
    Upon the brook that brawls along this wood!
    To the which place a poor sequest'red stag,
    That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
    Did come to languish; and, indeed, my lord,
    The wretched animal heav'd forth such groans
    That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
    Almost to bursting; and the big round tears
    Cours'd one another down his innocent nose
    In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool,
    Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
    Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
    Augmenting it with tears.
  DUKE SENIOR. But what said Jaques?
    Did he not moralize this spectacle?
  FIRST LORD. O, yes, into a thousand similes.
    First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
    'Poor deer,' quoth he 'thou mak'st a testament
    As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
    To that which had too much.' Then, being there alone,
    Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
    ''Tis right'; quoth he 'thus misery doth part
    The flux of company.' Anon, a careless herd,
    Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
    And never stays to greet him. 'Ay,' quoth Jaques
    'Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens;
    'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
    Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?'
    Thus most invectively he pierceth through
    The body of the country, city, court,
    Yea, and of this our life; swearing that we
    Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
    To fright the animals, and to kill them up
    In their assign'd and native dwelling-place.
  DUKE SENIOR. And did you leave him in this contemplation?
  SECOND LORD. We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
    Upon the sobbing deer.
  DUKE SENIOR. Show me the place;
    I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
    For then he's full of matter.
  FIRST LORD. I'll bring you to him straight.             Exeunt

SCENE II. The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with LORDS

  FREDERICK. Can it be possible that no man saw them?
    It cannot be; some villains of my court
    Are of consent and sufferance in this.
  FIRST LORD. I cannot hear of any that did see her.
    The ladies, her attendants of her chamber,
    Saw her abed, and in the morning early
    They found the bed untreasur'd of their mistress.
  SECOND LORD. My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
    Your Grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.
    Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
    Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
    Your daughter and her cousin much commend
    The parts and graces of the wrestler
    That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
    And she believes, wherever they are gone,
    That youth is surely in their company.
  FREDERICK. Send to his brother; fetch that gallant hither.
    If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
    I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly;
    And let not search and inquisition quail
    To bring again these foolish runaways.                Exeunt

SCENE III. Before OLIVER'S house

Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, meeting

  ORLANDO. Who's there?
  ADAM. What, my young master? O my gentle master!
    O my sweet master! O you memory
    Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
    Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
    And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
    Why would you be so fond to overcome
    The bonny prizer of the humorous Duke?
    Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
    Know you not, master, to some kind of men
    Their graces serve them but as enemies?
    No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master,
    Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
    O, what a world is this, when what is comely
    Envenoms him that bears it!
  ORLANDO. Why, what's the matter?
  ADAM. O unhappy youth!
    Come not within these doors; within this roof
    The enemy of all your graces lives.
    Your brother- no, no brother; yet the son-
    Yet not the son; I will not call him son
    Of him I was about to call his father-
    Hath heard your praises; and this night he means
    To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
    And you within it. If he fail of that,
    He will have other means to cut you off;
    I overheard him and his practices.
    This is no place; this house is but a butchery;
    Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
  ORLANDO. Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?
  ADAM. No matter whither, so you come not here.
  ORLANDO. What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
    Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
    A thievish living on the common road?
    This I must do, or know not what to do;
    Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
    I rather will subject me to the malice
    Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
  ADAM. But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
    The thrifty hire I sav'd under your father,
    Which I did store to be my foster-nurse,
    When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
    And unregarded age in corners thrown.
    Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
    Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
    Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;
    All this I give you. Let me be your servant;
    Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
    For in my youth I never did apply
    Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
    Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
    The means of weakness and debility;
    Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
    Frosty, but kindly. Let me go with you;
    I'll do the service of a younger man
    In all your business and necessities.
  ORLANDO. O good old man, how well in thee appears
    The constant service of the antique world,
    When service sweat for duty, not for meed!
    Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
    Where none will sweat but for promotion,
    And having that do choke their service up
    Even with the having; it is not so with thee.
    But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
    That cannot so much as a blossom yield
    In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
    But come thy ways, we'll go along together,
    And ere we have thy youthful wages spent
    We'll light upon some settled low content.
  ADAM. Master, go on; and I will follow the
    To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.
    From seventeen years till now almost four-score
    Here lived I, but now live here no more.
    At seventeen years many their fortunes seek,
    But at fourscore it is too late a week;
    Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
    Than to die well and not my master's debtor.          Exeunt

SCENE IV. The Forest of Arden

Enter ROSALIND for GANYMEDE, CELIA for ALIENA, and CLOWN alias
TOUCHSTONE

  ROSALIND. O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
  TOUCHSTONE. I Care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
  ROSALIND. I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel,
    and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as
    doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat;
    therefore, courage, good Aliena.
  CELIA. I pray you bear with me; I cannot go no further.
  TOUCHSTONE. For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you;
    yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you; for I think you
    have no money in your purse.
  ROSALIND. Well,. this is the Forest of Arden.
  TOUCHSTONE. Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fool I; when I was at
    home I was in a better place; but travellers must be content.

                        Enter CORIN and SILVIUS

  ROSALIND. Ay, be so, good Touchstone. Look you, who comes here, a
    young man and an old in solemn talk.
  CORIN. That is the way to make her scorn you still.
  SILVIUS. O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!
  CORIN. I partly guess; for I have lov'd ere now.
  SILVIUS. No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
    Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
    As ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow.
    But if thy love were ever like to mine,
    As sure I think did never man love so,
    How many actions most ridiculous
    Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
  CORIN. Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
  SILVIUS. O, thou didst then never love so heartily!
    If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
    That ever love did make thee run into,
    Thou hast not lov'd;
    Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
    Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
    Thou hast not lov'd;
    Or if thou hast not broke from company
    Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
    Thou hast not lov'd.
    O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!                          Exit Silvius
  ROSALIND. Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound,
    I have by hard adventure found mine own.
  TOUCHSTONE. And I mine. I remember, when I was in love, I broke my
    sword upon a stone, and bid him take that for coming a-night to
    Jane Smile; and I remember the kissing of her batler, and the
    cow's dugs that her pretty chopt hands had milk'd; and I remember
    the wooing of  peascod instead of her; from whom I took two cods,
    and giving her them again, said with weeping tears 'Wear these
    for my sake.' We that are true lovers run into strange capers;
    but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal
    in folly.
  ROSALIND. Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.
  TOUCHSTONE. Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I break
    my shins against it.
  ROSALIND. Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion
    Is much upon my fashion.
  TOUCHSTONE. And mine; but it grows something stale with me.
  CELIA. I pray you, one of you question yond man
    If he for gold will give us any food;
    I faint almost to death.
  TOUCHSTONE. Holla, you clown!
  ROSALIND. Peace, fool; he's not thy Ensman.
  CORIN. Who calls?
  TOUCHSTONE. Your betters, sir.
  CORIN. Else are they very wretched.
  ROSALIND. Peace, I say. Good even to you, friend.
  CORIN. And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
  ROSALIND. I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
    Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
    Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
    Here's a young maid with travel much oppress'd,
    And faints for succour.
  CORIN. Fair sir, I pity her,
    And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
    My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
    But I am shepherd to another man,
    And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
    My master is of churlish disposition,
    And little recks to find the way to heaven
    By doing deeds of hospitality.
    Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed,
    Are now on sale; and at our sheepcote now,
    By reason of his absence, there is nothing
    That you will feed on; but what is, come see,
    And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
  ROSALIND. What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
  CORIN. That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
    That little cares for buying any thing.
  ROSALIND. I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
    Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
    And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
  CELIA. And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
    And willingly could waste my time in it.
  CORIN. Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
    Go with me; if you like upon report
    The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
    I will your very faithful feeder be,
    And buy it with your gold right suddenly.             Exeunt

SCENE V. Another part of the forest

Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and OTHERS

                       SONG
  AMIENS.    Under the greenwood tree
               Who loves to lie with me,
               And turn his merry note
               Unto the sweet bird's throat,
             Come hither, come hither, come hither.
               Here shall he see
               No enemy
             But winter and rough weather.

  JAQUES. More, more, I prithee, more.
  AMIENS. It will make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.
  JAQUES. I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy
    out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs. More, I prithee, more.
  AMIENS. My voice is ragged; I know I cannot please you.
  JAQUES. I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to sing.
    Come, more; another stanzo. Call you 'em stanzos?
  AMIENS. What you will, Monsieur Jaques.
  JAQUES. Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me nothing. Will
    you sing?
  AMIENS. More at your request than to please myself.
  JAQUES. Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank you; but
    that they call compliment is like th' encounter of two dog-apes;
    and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks have given him a
    penny, and he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing; and you
    that will not, hold your tongues.
  AMIENS. Well, I'll end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the Duke
    will drink under this tree. He hath been all this day to look
    you.
  JAQUES. And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is to
    disputable for my company. I think of as many matters as he; but
    I give heaven thanks, and make no boast of them. Come, warble,
    come.

                       SONG
              [All together here]

           Who doth ambition shun,
           And loves to live i' th' sun,
           Seeking the food he eats,
           And pleas'd with what he gets,
         Come hither, come hither, come hither.
           Here shall he see
           No enemy
           But winter and rough weather.

  JAQUES. I'll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in
    despite of my invention.
  AMIENS. And I'll sing it.
  JAQUES. Thus it goes:

             If it do come to pass
             That any man turn ass,
             Leaving his wealth and ease
             A stubborn will to please,
           Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame;
             Here shall he see
             Gross fools as he,
             An if he will come to me.

  AMIENS. What's that 'ducdame'?
  JAQUES. 'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. I'll
    go sleep, if I can; if I cannot, I'll rail against all the
    first-born of Egypt.
  AMIENS. And I'll go seek the Duke; his banquet is prepar'd.
                                                Exeunt severally

SCENE VI. The forest

Enter ORLANDO and ADAM

  ADAM. Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for food! Here lie
    I down, and measure out my grave. Farewell, kind master.
  ORLANDO. Why, how now, Adam! No greater heart in thee? Live a
    little; comfort a little; cheer thyself a little. If this uncouth
    forest yield anything savage, I will either be food for it or
    bring it for food to thee. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy
    powers. For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at the
    arm's end. I will here be with the presently; and if I bring thee
    not something to eat, I will give thee leave to die; but if thou
    diest before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Well said!
    thou look'st cheerly; and I'll be with thee quickly. Yet thou
    liest in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some shelter;
    and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live
    anything in this desert. Cheerly, good Adam!          Exeunt

SCENE VII. The forest

A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and LORDS, like outlaws

  DUKE SENIOR. I think he be transform'd into a beast;
    For I can nowhere find him like a man.
  FIRST LORD. My lord, he is but even now gone hence;
    Here was he merry, hearing of a song.
  DUKE SENIOR. If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
    We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
    Go seek him; tell him I would speak with him.

                         Enter JAQUES

  FIRST LORD. He saves my labour by his own approach.
  DUKE SENIOR. Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
    That your poor friends must woo your company?
    What, you look merrily!
  JAQUES. A fool, a fool! I met a fool i' th' forest,
    A motley fool. A miserable world!
    As I do live by food, I met a fool,
    Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
    And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms,
    In good set terms- and yet a motley fool.
    'Good morrow, fool,' quoth I; 'No, sir,' quoth he,
    'Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune.'
    And then he drew a dial from his poke,
    And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
    Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock;
    Thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world wags;
    'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine;
    And after one hour more 'twill be eleven;
    And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
    And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
    And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
    The motley fool thus moral on the time,
    My lungs began to crow like chanticleer
    That fools should be so deep contemplative;
    And I did laugh sans intermission
    An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
    A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.
  DUKE SENIOR. What fool is this?
  JAQUES. O worthy fool! One that hath been a courtier,
    And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
    They have the gift to know it; and in his brain,
    Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
    After a voyage, he hath strange places cramm'd
    With observation, the which he vents
    In mangled forms. O that I were a fool!
    I am ambitious for a motley coat.
  DUKE SENIOR. Thou shalt have one.
  JAQUES. It is my only suit,
    Provided that you weed your better judgments
    Of all opinion that grows rank in them
    That I am wise. I must have liberty
    Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
    To blow on whom I please, for so fools have;
    And they that are most galled with my folly,
    They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
    The why is plain as way to parish church:
    He that a fool doth very wisely hit
    Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
    Not to seem senseless of the bob; if not,
    The wise man's folly is anatomiz'd
    Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
    Invest me in my motley; give me leave
    To speak my mind, and I will through and through
    Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
    If they will patiently receive my medicine.
  DUKE SENIOR. Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.
  JAQUES. What, for a counter, would I do but good?
  DUKE SENIOR. Most Mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin;
    For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
    As sensual as the brutish sting itself;
    And all th' embossed sores and headed evils
    That thou with license of free foot hast caught
    Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.
  JAQUES. Why, who cries out on pride
    That can therein tax any private party?
    Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
    Till that the wearer's very means do ebb?
    What woman in the city do I name
    When that I say the city-woman bears
    The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
    Who can come in and say that I mean her,
    When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
    Or what is he of basest function
    That says his bravery is not on my cost,
    Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
    His folly to the mettle of my speech?
    There then! how then? what then? Let me see wherein
    My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
    Then he hath wrong'd himself; if he be free,
    Why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies,
    Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?

             Enter ORLANDO with his sword drawn

  ORLANDO. Forbear, and eat no more.
  JAQUES. Why, I have eat none yet.
  ORLANDO. Nor shalt not, till necessity be serv'd.
  JAQUES. Of what kind should this cock come of?
  DUKE SENIOR. Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distress?
    Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
    That in civility thou seem'st so empty?
  ORLANDO. You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
    Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
    Of smooth civility; yet arn I inland bred,
    And know some nurture. But forbear, I say;
    He dies that touches any of this fruit
    Till I and my affairs are answered.
  JAQUES. An you will not be answer'd with reason, I must die.
  DUKE SENIOR. What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
    More than your force move us to gentleness.
  ORLANDO. I almost die for food, and let me have it.
  DUKE SENIOR. Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
  ORLANDO. Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you;
    I thought that all things had been savage here,
    And therefore put I on the countenance
    Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
    That in this desert inaccessible,
    Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
    Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;
    If ever you have look'd on better days,
    If ever been where bells have knoll'd to church,
    If ever sat at any good man's feast,
    If ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear,
    And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
    Let gentleness my strong enforcement be;
    In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.
  DUKE SENIOR. True is it that we have seen better days,
    And have with holy bell been knoll'd to church,
    And sat at good men's feasts, and wip'd our eyes
    Of drops that sacred pity hath engend'red;
    And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
    And take upon command what help we have
    That to your wanting may be minist'red.
  ORLANDO. Then but forbear your food a little while,
    Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn,
    And give it food. There is an old poor man
    Who after me hath many a weary step
    Limp'd in pure love; till he be first suffic'd,
    Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
    I will not touch a bit.
  DUKE SENIOR. Go find him out.
    And we will nothing waste till you return.
  ORLANDO. I thank ye; and be blest for your good comfort!
 Exit
  DUKE SENIOR. Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy:
    This wide and universal theatre
    Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
    Wherein we play in.
  JAQUES. All the world's a stage,
    And all the men and women merely players;
    They have their exits and their entrances;
    And one man in his time plays many parts,
    His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
    Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms;
    Then the whining school-boy, with his satchel
    And shining morning face, creeping like snail
    Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
    Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
    Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
    Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
    Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel,
    Seeking the bubble reputation
    Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
    In fair round belly with good capon lin'd,
    With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
    Full of wise saws and modern instances;
    And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
    Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
    With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
    His youthful hose, well sav'd, a world too wide
    For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
    Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
    And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
    That ends this strange eventful history,
    Is second childishness and mere oblivion;
    Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.

                  Re-enter ORLANDO with ADAM

  DUKE SENIOR. Welcome. Set down your venerable burden.
    And let him feed.
  ORLANDO. I thank you most for him.
  ADAM. So had you need;
    I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
  DUKE SENIOR. Welcome; fall to. I will not trouble you
    As yet to question you about your fortunes.
    Give us some music; and, good cousin, sing.

                         SONG
            Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
            Thou art not so unkind
              As man's ingratitude;
            Thy tooth is not so keen,
            Because thou art not seen,
              Although thy breath be rude.
    Heigh-ho! sing heigh-ho! unto the green holly.
    Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
            Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
              This life is most jolly.

            Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
            That dost not bite so nigh
              As benefits forgot;
            Though thou the waters warp,
            Thy sting is not so sharp
              As friend rememb'red not.
    Heigh-ho! sing, &c.

  DUKE SENIOR. If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
    As you have whisper'd faithfully you were,
    And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
    Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
    Be truly welcome hither. I am the Duke
    That lov'd your father. The residue of your fortune,
    Go to my cave and tell me. Good old man,
    Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
    Support him by the arm. Give me your hand,
    And let me all your fortunes understand.              Exeunt

ACT III. SCENE I. The palace

Enter DUKE FREDERICK, OLIVER, and LORDS

  FREDERICK. Not see him since! Sir, sir, that cannot be.
    But were I not the better part made mercy,
    I should not seek an absent argument
    Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
    Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is;
    Seek him with candle; bring him dead or living
    Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
    To seek a living in our territory.
    Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine
    Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
    Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
    Of what we think against thee.
  OLIVER. O that your Highness knew my heart in this!
    I never lov'd my brother in my life.
  FREDERICK. More villain thou. Well, push him out of doors;
    And let my officers of such a nature
    Make an extent upon his house and lands.
    Do this expediently, and turn him going.              Exeunt

SCENE II. The forest

Enter ORLANDO, with a paper

  ORLANDO. Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love;
    And thou, thrice-crowned Queen of Night, survey
    With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
    Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
    O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books,
    And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
    That every eye which in this forest looks
    Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.
    Run, run, Orlando; carve on every tree,
    The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.             Exit

                     Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE

  CORIN. And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good
    life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is nought.
    In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well; but in
    respect that it is private, it is a very vile life. Now in
    respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect
    it is not in the court, it is tedious. As it is a spare life,
    look you, it fits my humour well; but as there is no more plenty
    in it, it goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in
    thee, shepherd?
  CORIN. No more but that I know the more one sickens the worse at
    ease he is; and that he that wants money, means, and content, is
    without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet,
    and fire to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a
    great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath
    learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding,
    or comes of a very dull kindred.
  TOUCHSTONE. Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
    court, shepherd?
  CORIN. No, truly.
  TOUCHSTONE. Then thou art damn'd.
  CORIN. Nay, I hope.
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, thou art damn'd, like an ill-roasted egg, all on
    one side.
  CORIN. For not being at court? Your reason.
  TOUCHSTONE. Why, if thou never wast at court thou never saw'st good
    manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, then thy manners must
    be wicked; and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art
    in a parlous state, shepherd.
  CORIN. Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good manners at the
    court are as ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the
    country is most mockable at the court. You told me you salute not
    at the court, but you kiss your hands; that courtesy would be
    uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.
  TOUCHSTONE. Instance, briefly; come, instance.
  CORIN. Why, we are still handling our ewes; and their fells, you
    know, are greasy.
  TOUCHSTONE. Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? And is not the
    grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow,
    shallow. A better instance, I say; come.
  CORIN. Besides, our hands are hard.
  TOUCHSTONE. Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow again. A
    more sounder instance; come.
  CORIN. And they are often tarr'd over with the surgery of our
    sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? The courtier's hands are
    perfum'd with civet.
  TOUCHSTONE. Most shallow man! thou worm's meat in respect of a good
    piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and perpend: civet is
    of a baser birth than tar- the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend
    the instance, shepherd.
  CORIN. You have too courtly a wit for me; I'll rest.
  TOUCHSTONE. Wilt thou rest damn'd? God help thee, shallow man! God
    make incision in thee! thou art raw.
  CORIN. Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get that I
    wear; owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness; glad of other
    men's good, content with my harm; and the greatest of my pride is
    to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.
  TOUCHSTONE. That is another simple sin in you: to bring the ewes
    and the rams together, and to offer to get your living by the
    copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bell-wether, and to betray
    a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to crooked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,
    out of all reasonable match. If thou beest not damn'd for this,
    the devil himself will have no shepherds; I cannot see else how
    thou shouldst scape.
  CORIN. Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.

                  Enter ROSALIND, reading a paper

  ROSALIND.   'From the east to western Inde,
              No jewel is like Rosalinde.
              Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
              Through all the world bears Rosalinde.
              All the pictures fairest lin'd
              Are but black to Rosalinde.
              Let no face be kept in mind
              But the fair of Rosalinde.'
  TOUCHSTONE. I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners, and
    suppers, and sleeping hours, excepted. It is the right
    butter-women's rank to market.
  ROSALIND. Out, fool!
  TOUCHSTONE.   For a taste:
                If a hart do lack a hind,
                Let him seek out Rosalinde.
                If the cat will after kind,
                So be sure will Rosalinde.
                Winter garments must be lin'd,
                So must slender Rosalinde.
                They that reap must sheaf and bind,
                Then to cart with Rosalinde.
                Sweetest nut hath sourest rind,
                Such a nut is Rosalinde.
                He that sweetest rose will find
                Must find love's prick and Rosalinde.
    This is the very false gallop of verses; why do you infect
    yourself with them?
  ROSALIND. Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
  ROSALIND. I'll graff it with you, and then I shall graff it with a
    medlar. Then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country; for
    you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right
    virtue of the medlar.
  TOUCHSTONE. You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the forest
    judge.

                      Enter CELIA, with a writing

  ROSALIND. Peace!
    Here comes my sister, reading; stand aside.
  CELIA.   'Why should this a desert be?
             For it is unpeopled? No;
           Tongues I'll hang on every tree
             That shall civil sayings show.
           Some, how brief the life of man
             Runs his erring pilgrimage,
           That the streching of a span
             Buckles in his sum of age;
           Some, of violated vows
             'Twixt the souls of friend and friend;
           But upon the fairest boughs,
             Or at every sentence end,
           Will I Rosalinda write,
             Teaching all that read to know
           The quintessence of every sprite
             Heaven would in little show.
           Therefore heaven Nature charg'd
             That one body should be fill'd
           With all graces wide-enlarg'd.
             Nature presently distill'd
           Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
             Cleopatra's majesty,
           Atalanta's better part,
             Sad Lucretia's modesty.
           Thus Rosalinde of many parts
             By heavenly synod was devis'd,
           Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
             To have the touches dearest priz'd.
           Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
           And I to live and die her slave.'
  ROSALIND. O most gentle pulpiter! What tedious homily of love have
    you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried 'Have
    patience, good people.'
  CELIA. How now! Back, friends; shepherd, go off a little; go with
    him, sirrah.
  TOUCHSTONE. Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat;
    though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
                                     Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE
  CELIA. Didst thou hear these verses?
  ROSALIND. O, yes, I heard them all, and more too; for some of them
    had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
  CELIA. That's no matter; the feet might bear the verses.
  ROSALIND. Ay, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves
    without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.
  CELIA. But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be
    hang'd and carved upon these trees?
  ROSALIND. I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you
    came; for look here what I found on a palm-tree. I was never so
    berhym'd since Pythagoras' time that I was an Irish rat, which I
    can hardly remember.
  CELIA. Trow you who hath done this?
  ROSALIND. Is it a man?
  CELIA. And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
    Change you colour?
  ROSALIND. I prithee, who?
  CELIA. O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but
    mountains may be remov'd with earthquakes, and so encounter.
  ROSALIND. Nay, but who is it?
  CELIA. Is it possible?
  ROSALIND. Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell
    me who it is.
  CELIA. O wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yet
    again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!
  ROSALIND. Good my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
    caparison'd like a man, I have a doublet and hose in my
    disposition? One inch of delay more is a South Sea of discovery.
    I prithee tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. I would
    thou could'st stammer, that thou mightst pour this conceal'd man
    out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of narrow-mouth'd bottle-
    either too much at once or none at all. I prithee take the cork
    out of thy mouth that I may drink thy tidings.
  CELIA. So you may put a man in your belly.
  ROSALIND. Is he of God's making? What manner of man?
    Is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?
  CELIA. Nay, he hath but a little beard.
  ROSALIND. Why, God will send more if the man will be thankful. Let
    me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the
    knowledge of his chin.
  CELIA. It is young Orlando, that tripp'd up the wrestler's heels
    and your heart both in an instant.
  ROSALIND. Nay, but the devil take mocking! Speak sad brow and true
    maid.
  CELIA. I' faith, coz, 'tis he.
  ROSALIND. Orlando?
  CELIA. Orlando.
  ROSALIND. Alas the day! what shall I do with my doublet and hose?
    What did he when thou saw'st him? What said he? How look'd he?
    Wherein went he? What makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where
    remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him
    again? Answer me in one word.
  CELIA. You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first; 'tis a word too
    great for any mouth of this age's size. To say ay and no to these
    particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.
  ROSALIND. But doth he know that I am in this forest, and in man's
    apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
  CELIA. It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
    propositions of a lover; but take a taste of my finding him, and
    relish it with good observance. I found him under a tree, like a
    dropp'd acorn.
  ROSALIND. It may well be call'd Jove's tree, when it drops forth
    such fruit.
  CELIA. Give me audience, good madam.
  ROSALIND. Proceed.
  CELIA. There lay he, stretch'd along like a wounded knight.
  ROSALIND. Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes
    the ground.
  CELIA. Cry 'Holla' to thy tongue, I prithee; it curvets
    unseasonably. He was furnish'd like a hunter.
  ROSALIND. O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
  CELIA. I would sing my song without a burden; thou bring'st me out
    of tune.
  ROSALIND. Do you not know I am a woman? When I think, I must speak.
    Sweet, say on.
  CELIA. You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?

                   Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES

  ROSALIND. 'Tis he; slink by, and note him. JAQUES. I thank you for
  your company; but, good faith, I had as lief have been myself alone.
  ORLANDO. And so had I; but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for
  your society. JAQUES. God buy you; let's meet as little as we can.
  ORLANDO. I do desire we may be better strangers. JAQUES. I pray you
  mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks. ORLANDO. I
  pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.
  JAQUES. Rosalind is your love's name? ORLANDO. Yes, just. JAQUES. I
  do not like her name. ORLANDO. There was no thought of pleasing you
  when she was christen'd. JAQUES. What stature is she of? ORLANDO.
  Just as high as my heart. JAQUES. You are full of pretty answers.
  Have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conn'd them
  out of rings? ORLANDO. Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth,
  from whence you have studied your questions. JAQUES. You have a
  nimble wit; I think 'twas made of Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down
  with me? and we two will rail against our mistress the world, and all
  our misery. ORLANDO. I will chide no breather in the world but
  myself, against whom I know most faults. JAQUES. The worst fault you
  have is to be in love. ORLANDO. 'Tis a fault I will not change for
  your best virtue. I am weary of you. JAQUES. By my troth, I was
  seeking for a fool when I found you. ORLANDO. He is drown'd in the
  brook; look but in, and you shall see him. JAQUES. There I shall see
  mine own figure. ORLANDO. Which I take to be either a fool or a
  cipher. JAQUES. I'll tarry no longer with you; farewell, good Signior
  Love. ORLANDO. I am glad of your departure; adieu, good Monsieur
  Melancholy. Exit JAQUES ROSALIND. [Aside to CELIA] I will speak to
  him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave with
  him.- Do you hear, forester? ORLANDO. Very well; what would you?
  ROSALIND. I pray you, what is't o'clock? ORLANDO. You should ask me
  what time o' day; there's no clock in the forest. ROSALIND. Then
  there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute and
  groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a
  clock. ORLANDO. And why not the swift foot of Time? Had not that been
  as proper? ROSALIND. By no means, sir. Time travels in divers paces
  with divers persons. I'll tell you who Time ambles withal, who Time
  trots withal, who Time gallops withal, and who he stands still
  withal. ORLANDO. I prithee, who doth he trot withal? ROSALIND. Marry,
  he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her marriage
  and the day it is solemniz'd; if the interim be but a se'nnight,
  Time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven year.
  ORLANDO. Who ambles Time withal? ROSALIND. With a priest that lacks
  Latin and a rich man that hath not the gout; for the one sleeps
  easily because he cannot study, and the other lives merrily because
  he feels no pain; the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful
  learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. These
  Time ambles withal. ORLANDO. Who doth he gallop withal? ROSALIND.
  With a thief to the gallows; for though he go as softly as foot can
  fall, he thinks himself too soon there. ORLANDO. Who stays it still
  withal? ROSALIND. With lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep
  between term and term, and then they perceive not how Time moves.
  ORLANDO. Where dwell you, pretty youth? ROSALIND. With this
  shepherdess, my sister; here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe
  upon a petticoat. ORLANDO. Are you native of this place? ROSALIND. As
  the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled. ORLANDO. Your
  accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a
  dwelling. ROSALIND. I have been told so of many; but indeed an old
  religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an
  inland man; one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in
  love. I have heard him read many lectures against it; and I thank God
  I am not a woman, to be touch'd with so many giddy offences as he
  hath generally tax'd their whole sex withal. ORLANDO. Can you
  remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of
  women? ROSALIND. There were none principal; they were all like one
  another as halfpence are; every one fault seeming monstrous till his
  fellow-fault came to match it. ORLANDO. I prithee recount some of
  them. ROSALIND. No; I will not cast away my physic but on those that
  are sick. There is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young
  plants with carving 'Rosalind' on their barks; hangs odes upon
  hawthorns and elegies on brambles; all, forsooth, deifying the name
  of Rosalind. If I could meet that fancy-monger, I would give him some
  good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love upon him.
  ORLANDO. I am he that is so love-shak'd; I pray you tell me your
  remedy. ROSALIND. There is none of my uncle's marks upon you; he
  taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage of rushes I am
  sure you are not prisoner. ORLANDO. What were his marks? ROSALIND. A
  lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have
  not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected,
  which you have not; but I pardon you for that, for simply your having
  in beard is a younger brother's revenue. Then your hose should be
  ungarter'd, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbutton'd, your shoe
  untied, and every thing about you demonstrating a careless
  desolation. But you are no such man; you are rather point-device in
  your accoutrements, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any
  other. ORLANDO. Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.
  ROSALIND. Me believe it! You may as soon make her that you love
  believe it; which, I warrant, she is apter to do than to confess she
  does. That is one of the points in the which women still give the lie
  to their consciences. But, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the
  verses on the trees wherein Rosalind is so admired? ORLANDO. I swear
  to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he, that
  unfortunate he. ROSALIND. But are you so much in love as your rhymes
  speak? ORLANDO. Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
  ROSALIND. Love is merely a madness; and, I tell you, deserves as well
  a dark house and a whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are not
  so punish'd and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the
  whippers are in love too. Yet I profess curing it by counsel.
  ORLANDO. Did you ever cure any so? ROSALIND. Yes, one; and in this
  manner. He was to imagine me his love, his mistress; and I set him
  every day to woo me; at which time would I, being but a moonish
  youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud,
  fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of
  smiles; for every passion something and for no passion truly
  anything, as boys and women are for the most part cattle of this
  colour; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then
  forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him; that I drave my
  suitor from his mad humour of love to a living humour of madness;
  which was, to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a
  nook merely monastic. And thus I cur'd him; and this way will I take
  upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart, that
  there shall not be one spot of love in 't. ORLANDO. I would not be
  cured, youth. ROSALIND. I would cure you, if you would but call me
  Rosalind, and come every day to my cote and woo me. ORLANDO. Now, by
  the faith of my love, I will. Tell me where it is. ROSALIND. Go with
  me to it, and I'll show it you; and, by the way, you shall tell me
  where in the forest you live. Will you go? ORLANDO. With all my
  heart, good youth. ROSALIND. Nay, you must call me Rosalind. Come,
  sister, will you go?                                                 
   Exeunt

SCENE III. The forest

Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY; JAQUES behind

  TOUCHSTONE. Come apace, good Audrey; I will fetch up your goats,
    Audrey. And how, Audrey, am I the man yet? Doth my simple feature
    content you?
  AUDREY. Your features! Lord warrant us! What features?
  TOUCHSTONE. I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most
    capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.
  JAQUES. [Aside] O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in a
    thatch'd house!
  TOUCHSTONE. When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's
    good wit seconded with the forward child understanding, it
    strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room.
    Truly, I would the gods had made thee poetical.
  AUDREY. I do not know what 'poetical' is. Is it honest in deed and
    word? Is it a true thing?
  TOUCHSTONE. No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most feigning,
    and lovers are given to poetry; and what they swear in poetry may
    be said as lovers they do feign.
  AUDREY. Do you wish, then, that the gods had made me poetical?
  TOUCHSTONE. I do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou art honest;
    now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some hope thou didst
    feign.
  AUDREY. Would you not have me honest?
  TOUCHSTONE. No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favour'd; for honesty
    coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.
  JAQUES. [Aside] A material fool!
  AUDREY. Well, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods make me
    honest.
  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were
    to put good meat into an unclean dish.
  AUDREY. I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.
  TOUCHSTONE. Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness;
    sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may be, I will
    marry thee; and to that end I have been with Sir Oliver Martext,
    the vicar of the next village, who hath promis'd to meet me in
    this place of the forest, and to couple us.
  JAQUES. [Aside] I would fain see this meeting.
  AUDREY. Well, the gods give us joy!
  TOUCHSTONE. Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger
    in this attempt; for here we have no temple but the wood, no
    assembly but horn-beasts. But what though? Courage! As horns are
    odious, they are necessary. It is said: 'Many a man knows no end
    of his goods.' Right! Many a man has good horns and knows no end
    of them. Well, that is the dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his
    own getting. Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no; the noblest
    deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man therefore
    blessed? No; as a wall'd town is more worthier than a village, so
    is the forehead of a married man more honourable than the bare
    brow of a bachelor; and by how much defence is better than no
    skill, by so much is horn more precious than to want. Here comes
    Sir Oliver.

                       Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT

    Sir Oliver Martext, you are well met. Will you dispatch us here
    under this tree, or shall we go with you to your chapel?
  MARTEXT. Is there none here to give the woman?
  TOUCHSTONE. I will not take her on gift of any man.
  MARTEXT. Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
  JAQUES. [Discovering himself] Proceed, proceed; I'll give her.
  TOUCHSTONE. Good even, good Master What-ye-call't; how do you, sir?
    You are very well met. Goddild you for your last company. I am
    very glad to see you. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay; pray be
    cover'd.
  JAQUES. Will you be married, motley?
  TOUCHSTONE. As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and
    the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons
    bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
  JAQUES. And will you, being a man of your breeding, be married
    under a bush, like a beggar? Get you to church and have a good
    priest that can tell you what marriage is; this fellow will but
    join you together as they join wainscot; then one of you will
    prove a shrunk panel, and like green timber warp, warp.
  TOUCHSTONE. [Aside] I am not in the mind but I were better to be
    married of him than of another; for he is not like to marry me
    well; and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me
    hereafter to leave my wife.
  JAQUES. Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
  TOUCHSTONE. Come, sweet Audrey;
    We must be married or we must live in bawdry.
    Farewell, good Master Oliver. Not-
               O sweet Oliver,
               O brave Oliver,
           Leave me not behind thee.
    But-
                 Wind away,
               Begone, I say,
           I will not to wedding with thee.
                           Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE, and AUDREY
  MARTEXT. 'Tis no matter; ne'er a fantastical knave of them all
    shall flout me out of my calling.                       Exit

SCENE IV. The forest

Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

  ROSALIND. Never talk to me; I will weep.
  CELIA. Do, I prithee; but yet have the grace to consider that tears
    do not become a man.
  ROSALIND. But have I not cause to weep?
  CELIA. As good cause as one would desire; therefore weep.
  ROSALIND. His very hair is of the dissembling colour.
  CELIA. Something browner than Judas's.
    Marry, his kisses are Judas's own children.
  ROSALIND. I' faith, his hair is of a good colour.
  CELIA. An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.
  ROSALIND. And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of
    holy bread.
  CELIA. He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A nun of
    winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of
    chastity is in them.
  ROSALIND. But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
    comes not?
  CELIA. Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
  ROSALIND. Do you think so?
  CELIA. Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer; but
    for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as covered
    goblet or a worm-eaten nut.
  ROSALIND. Not true in love?
  CELIA. Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in.
  ROSALIND. You have heard him swear downright he was.
  CELIA. 'Was' is not 'is'; besides, the oath of a lover is no
    stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer
    of false reckonings. He attends here in the forest on the Duke,
    your father.
  ROSALIND. I met the Duke yesterday, and had much question with him.
    He asked me of what parentage I was; I told him, of as good as
    he; so he laugh'd and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when
    there is such a man as Orlando?
  CELIA. O, that's a brave man! He writes brave verses, speaks brave
    words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite
    traverse, athwart the heart of his lover; as a puny tilter, that
    spurs his horse but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble
    goose. But all's brave that youth mounts and folly guides. Who
    comes here?

                         Enter CORIN

  CORIN. Mistress and master, you have oft enquired
    After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
    Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
    Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
    That was his mistress.
  CELIA. Well, and what of him?
  CORIN. If you will see a pageant truly play'd
    Between the pale complexion of true love
    And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
    Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you,
    If you will mark it.
  ROSALIND. O, come, let us remove!
    The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
    Bring us to this sight, and you shall say
    I'll prove a busy actor in their play.                Exeunt

SCENE V. Another part of the forest

Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

  SILVIUS. Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me; do not, Phebe.
    Say that you love me not; but say not so
    In bitterness. The common executioner,
    Whose heart th' accustom'd sight of death makes hard,
    Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
    But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
    Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

          Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, at a distance

  PHEBE. I would not be thy executioner;
    I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
    Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.
    'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable,
    That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
    Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
    Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!
    Now I do frown on thee with all my heart;
    And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
    Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
    Or, if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
    Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
    Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
    Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
    Some scar of it; lean upon a rush,
    The cicatrice and capable impressure
    Thy palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes,
    Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
    Nor, I am sure, there is not force in eyes
    That can do hurt.
  SILVIUS. O dear Phebe,
    If ever- as that ever may be near-
    You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
    Then shall you know the wounds invisible
    That love's keen arrows make.
  PHEBE. But till that time
    Come not thou near me; and when that time comes,
    Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not;
    As till that time I shall not pity thee.
  ROSALIND. [Advancing] And why, I pray you? Who might be your
      mother,
    That you insult, exult, and all at once,
    Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty-
    As, by my faith, I see no more in you
    Than without candle may go dark to bed-
    Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
    Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
    I see no more in you than in the ordinary
    Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my little life,
    I think she means to tangle my eyes too!
    No faith, proud mistress, hope not after it;
    'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
    Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream,
    That can entame my spirits to your worship.
    You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
    Like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain?
    You are a thousand times a properer man
    Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you
    That makes the world full of ill-favour'd children.
    'Tis not her glass, but you, that flatters her;
    And out of you she sees herself more proper
    Than any of her lineaments can show her.
    But, mistress, know yourself. Down on your knees,
    And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love;
    For I must tell you friendly in your ear:
    Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.
    Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer;
    Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
    So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.
  PHEBE. Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together;
    I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
  ROSALIND. He's fall'n in love with your foulness, and she'll fall
    in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee
    with frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words. Why look
    you so upon me?
  PHEBE. For no ill will I bear you.
  ROSALIND. I pray you do not fall in love with me,
    For I am falser than vows made in wine;
    Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
    'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
    Will you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
    Come, sister. Shepherdess, look on him better,
    And be not proud; though all the world could see,
    None could be so abus'd in sight as he.
    Come, to our flock.        Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN
  PHEBE. Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
    'Who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight?'
  SILVIUS. Sweet Phebe.
  PHEBE. Ha! what say'st thou, Silvius?
  SILVIUS. Sweet Phebe, pity me.
  PHEBE. Why, I arn sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.
  SILVIUS. Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
    If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
    By giving love, your sorrow and my grief
    Were both extermin'd.
  PHEBE. Thou hast my love; is not that neighbourly?
  SILVIUS. I would have you.
  PHEBE. Why, that were covetousness.
    Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
    And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
    But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
    Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
    I will endure; and I'll employ thee too.
    But do not look for further recompense
    Than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd.
  SILVIUS. So holy and so perfect is my love,
    And I in such a poverty of grace,
    That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
    To glean the broken ears after the man
    That the main harvest reaps; loose now and then
    A scatt'red smile, and that I'll live upon.
  PHEBE. Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
  SILVIUS. Not very well; but I have met him oft;
    And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
    That the old carlot once was master of.
  PHEBE. Think not I love him, though I ask for him;
    'Tis but a peevish boy; yet he talks well.
    But what care I for words? Yet words do well
    When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
    It is a pretty youth- not very pretty;
    But, sure, he's proud; and yet his pride becomes him.
    He'll make a proper man. The best thing in him
    Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
    Did make offence, his eye did heal it up.
    He is not very tall; yet for his years he's tall;
    His leg is but so-so; and yet 'tis well.
    There was a pretty redness in his lip,
    A little riper and more lusty red
    Than that mix'd in his cheek; 'twas just the difference
    Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
    There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
    In parcels as I did, would have gone near
    To fall in love with him; but, for my part,
    I love him not, nor hate him not; and yet
    I have more cause to hate him than to love him;
    For what had he to do to chide at me?
    He said mine eyes were black, and my hair black,
    And, now I am rememb'red, scorn'd at me.
    I marvel why I answer'd not again;
    But that's all one: omittance is no quittance.
    I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
    And thou shalt bear it; wilt thou, Silvius?
  SILVIUS. Phebe, with all my heart.
  PHEBE. I'll write it straight;
    The matter's in my head and in my heart;
    I will be bitter with him and passing short.
    Go with me, Silvius.                                  Exeunt

ACT IV. SCENE I. The forest

Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES

  JAQUES. I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with
    thee.
  ROSALIND. They say you are a melancholy fellow.
  JAQUES. I am so; I do love it better than laughing.
  ROSALIND. Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
    fellows, and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than
    drunkards.
  JAQUES. Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.
  ROSALIND. Why then, 'tis good to be a post.
  JAQUES. I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is
    emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical; nor the
    courtier's, which is proud; nor the soldier's, which is
    ambitious; nor the lawyer's, which is politic; nor the lady's,
    which is nice; nor the lover's, which is all these; but it is a
    melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted
    from many objects, and, indeed, the sundry contemplation of my
    travels; in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous
    sadness.
  ROSALIND. A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be
    sad. I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's; then
    to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and
    poor hands.
  JAQUES. Yes, I have gain'd my experience.

                        Enter ORLANDO

  ROSALIND. And your experience makes you sad. I had rather have a
    fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad- and to
    travel for it too.
  ORLANDO. Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind!
  JAQUES. Nay, then, God buy you, an you talk in blank verse.
  ROSALIND. Farewell, Monsieur Traveller; look you lisp and wear
    strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be
    out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making
    you that countenance you are; or I will scarce think you have
    swam in a gondola. [Exit JAQUES] Why, how now, Orlando! where
    have you been all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
    another trick, never come in my sight more.
  ORLANDO. My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
  ROSALIND. Break an hour's promise in love! He that will divide a
    minute into a thousand parts, and break but a part of the
    thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said
    of him that Cupid hath clapp'd him o' th' shoulder, but I'll
    warrant him heart-whole.
  ORLANDO. Pardon me, dear Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. I had
    as lief be woo'd of a snail.
  ORLANDO. Of a snail!
  ROSALIND. Ay, of a snail; for though he comes slowly, he carries
    his house on his head- a better jointure, I think, than you make
    a woman; besides, he brings his destiny with him.
  ORLANDO. What's that?
  ROSALIND. Why, horns; which such as you are fain to be beholding to
    your wives for; but he comes armed in his fortune, and prevents
    the slander of his wife.
  ORLANDO. Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.
  ROSALIND. And I am your Rosalind.
  CELIA. It pleases him to call you so; but he hath a Rosalind of a
    better leer than you.
  ROSALIND. Come, woo me, woo me; for now I am in a holiday humour,
    and like enough to consent. What would you say to me now, an I
    were your very very Rosalind?
  ORLANDO. I would kiss before I spoke.
  ROSALIND. Nay, you were better speak first; and when you were
    gravell'd for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss.
    Very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for
    lovers lacking- God warn us!- matter, the cleanliest shift is to
    kiss.
  ORLANDO. How if the kiss be denied?
  ROSALIND. Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new
    matter.
  ORLANDO. Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
  ROSALIND. Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress; or I
    should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
  ORLANDO. What, of my suit?
  ROSALIND. Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.
    Am not I your Rosalind?
  ORLANDO. I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking
    of her.
  ROSALIND. Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.
  ORLANDO. Then, in mine own person, I die.
  ROSALIND. No, faith, die by attorney. The poor world is almost six
    thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man
    died in his own person, videlicet, in a love-cause. Troilus had
    his brains dash'd out with a Grecian club; yet he did what he
    could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love.
    Leander, he would have liv'd many a fair year, though Hero had
    turn'd nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer night; for,
    good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont, and,
    being taken with the cramp, was drown'd; and the foolish
    chroniclers of that age found it was- Hero of Sestos. But these
    are all lies: men have died from time to time, and worms have
    eaten them, but not for love.
  ORLANDO. I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind; for, I
    protest, her frown might kill me.
  ROSALIND. By this hand, it will not kill a fly. But come, now I
    will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition; and ask me
    what you will, I will grant it.
  ORLANDO. Then love me, Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays, and all.
  ORLANDO. And wilt thou have me?
  ROSALIND. Ay, and twenty such.
  ORLANDO. What sayest thou?
  ROSALIND. Are you not good?
  ORLANDO. I hope so.
  ROSALIND. Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing? Come,
    sister, you shall be the priest, and marry us. Give me your hand,
    Orlando. What do you say, sister?
  ORLANDO. Pray thee, marry us.
  CELIA. I cannot say the words.
  ROSALIND. You must begin 'Will you, Orlando'-
  CELIA. Go to. Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?
  ORLANDO. I will.
  ROSALIND. Ay, but when?
  ORLANDO. Why, now; as fast as she can marry us.
  ROSALIND. Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.'
  ORLANDO. I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.
  ROSALIND. I might ask you for your commission; but- I do take thee,
    Orlando, for my husband. There's a girl goes before the priest;
    and, certainly, a woman's thought runs before her actions.
  ORLANDO. So do all thoughts; they are wing'd.
  ROSALIND. Now tell me how long you would have her, after you have
    possess'd her.
  ORLANDO. For ever and a day.
  ROSALIND. Say 'a day' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando; men are
    April when they woo, December when they wed: maids are May when
    they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. I will
    be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,
    more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more new-fangled than
    an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. I will weep for
    nothing, like Diana in the fountain, and I will do that when you
    are dispos'd to be merry; I will laugh like a hyen, and that when
    thou are inclin'd to sleep.
  ORLANDO. But will my Rosalind do so?
  ROSALIND. By my life, she will do as I do.
  ORLANDO. O, but she is wise.
  ROSALIND. Or else she could not have the wit to do this. The wiser,
    the waywarder. Make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out
    at the casement; shut that, and 'twill out at the key-hole; stop
    that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.
  ORLANDO. A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say 'Wit,
    whither wilt?' ROSALIND. Nay, you might keep that check for it,
    till you met your
    wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
  ORLANDO. And what wit could wit have to excuse that?
  ROSALIND. Marry, to say she came to seek you there. You shall never
    take her without her answer, unless you take her without her
    tongue. O, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's
    occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will
    breed it like a fool!
  ORLANDO. For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.
  ROSALIND. Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours!
  ORLANDO. I must attend the Duke at dinner; by two o'clock I will be
    with thee again.
  ROSALIND. Ay, go your ways, go your ways. I knew what you would
    prove; my friends told me as much, and I thought no less. That
    flattering tongue of yours won me. 'Tis but one cast away, and
    so, come death! Two o'clock is your hour?
  ORLANDO. Ay, sweet Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and
    by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot
    of your promise, or come one minute behind your hour, I will
    think you the most pathetical break-promise, and the most hollow
    lover, and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalind, that may
    be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful. Therefore
    beware my censure, and keep your promise.
  ORLANDO. With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my
    Rosalind; so, adieu.
  ROSALIND. Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such
    offenders, and let Time try. Adieu.             Exit ORLANDO
  CELIA. You have simply misus'd our sex in your love-prate. We must
    have your doublet and hose pluck'd over your head, and show the
    world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
  ROSALIND. O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst
    know how many fathom deep I am in love! But it cannot be sounded;
    my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.
  CELIA. Or rather, bottomless; that as fast as you pour affection
    in, it runs out.
  ROSALIND. No; that same wicked bastard of Venus, that was begot of
    thought, conceiv'd of spleen, and born of madness; that blind
    rascally boy, that abuses every one's eyes, because his own are
    out- let him be judge how deep I am in love. I'll tell thee,
    Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando. I'll go find a
    shadow, and sigh till he come.
  CELIA. And I'll sleep.                                  Exeunt

SCENE II. The forest

        Enter JAQUES and LORDS, in the habit of foresters

  JAQUES. Which is he that killed the deer?
  LORD. Sir, it was I.
  JAQUES. Let's present him to the Duke, like a Roman conqueror; and
    it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a
    branch of victory. Have you no song, forester, for this purpose?
  LORD. Yes, sir.
  JAQUES. Sing it; 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise
    enough.

                    SONG.

      What shall he have that kill'd the deer?
      His leather skin and horns to wear.
                              [The rest shall hear this burden:]
           Then sing him home.

      Take thou no scorn to wear the horn;
      It was a crest ere thou wast born.
           Thy father's father wore it;
           And thy father bore it.
      The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
      Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.                   Exeunt

SCENE III. The forest

Enter ROSALIND and CELIA

  ROSALIND. How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock?
    And here much Orlando!
  CELIA. I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he hath
    ta'en his bow and arrows, and is gone forth- to sleep. Look, who
    comes here.

                      Enter SILVIUS

  SILVIUS. My errand is to you, fair youth;
    My gentle Phebe did bid me give you this.
    I know not the contents; but, as I guess
    By the stern brow and waspish action
    Which she did use as she was writing of it,
    It bears an angry tenour. Pardon me,
    I am but as a guiltless messenger.
  ROSALIND. Patience herself would startle at this letter,
    And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all.
    She says I am not fair, that I lack manners;
    She calls me proud, and that she could not love me,
    Were man as rare as Phoenix. 'Od's my will!
    Her love is not the hare that I do hunt;
    Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
    This is a letter of your own device.
  SILVIUS. No, I protest, I know not the contents;
    Phebe did write it.
  ROSALIND. Come, come, you are a fool,
    And turn'd into the extremity of love.
    I saw her hand; she has a leathern hand,
    A freestone-colour'd hand; I verily did think
    That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands;
    She has a huswife's hand- but that's no matter.
    I say she never did invent this letter:
    This is a man's invention, and his hand.
  SILVIUS. Sure, it is hers.
  ROSALIND. Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style;
    A style for challengers. Why, she defies me,
    Like Turk to Christian. Women's gentle brain
    Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
    Such Ethiope words, blacker in their effect
    Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?
  SILVIUS. So please you, for I never heard it yet;
    Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.
  ROSALIND. She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.
                                                         [Reads]

            'Art thou god to shepherd turn'd,
            That a maiden's heart hath burn'd?'

    Can a woman rail thus?
  SILVIUS. Call you this railing?
  ROSALIND. 'Why, thy godhead laid apart,
             Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?'

    Did you ever hear such railing?

            'Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
            That could do no vengeance to me.'

    Meaning me a beast.

            'If the scorn of your bright eyne
            Have power to raise such love in mine,
            Alack, in me what strange effect
            Would they work in mild aspect!
            Whiles you chid me, I did love;
            How then might your prayers move!
            He that brings this love to the
            Little knows this love in me;
            And by him seal up thy mind,
            Whether that thy youth and kind
            Will the faithful offer take
            Of me and all that I can make;
            Or else by him my love deny,
            And then I'll study how to die.'
  SILVIUS. Call you this chiding?
  CELIA. Alas, poor shepherd!
  ROSALIND. Do you pity him? No, he deserves no pity. Wilt thou love
    such a woman? What, to make thee an instrument, and play false
    strains upon thee! Not to be endur'd! Well, go your way to her,
    for I see love hath made thee tame snake, and say this to her-
    that if she love me, I charge her to love thee; if she will not,
    I will never have her unless thou entreat for her. If you be a
    true lover, hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.
                                                    Exit SILVIUS

                         Enter OLIVER

  OLIVER. Good morrow, fair ones; pray you, if you know,
    Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
    A sheep-cote fenc'd about with olive trees?
  CELIA. West of this place, down in the neighbour bottom.
    The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
    Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
    But at this hour the house doth keep itself;
    There's none within.
  OLIVER. If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
    Then should I know you by description-
    Such garments, and such years: 'The boy is fair,
    Of female favour, and bestows himself
    Like a ripe sister; the woman low,
    And browner than her brother.' Are not you
    The owner of the house I did inquire for?
  CELIA. It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.
  OLIVER. Orlando doth commend him to you both;
    And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
    He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
  ROSALIND. I am. What must we understand by this?
  OLIVER. Some of my shame; if you will know of me
    What man I am, and how, and why, and where,
    This handkercher was stain'd.
  CELIA. I pray you, tell it.
  OLIVER. When last the young Orlando parted from you,
    He left a promise to return again
    Within an hour; and, pacing through the forest,
    Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
    Lo, what befell! He threw his eye aside,
    And mark what object did present itself.
    Under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age,
    And high top bald with dry antiquity,
    A wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
    Lay sleeping on his back. About his neck
    A green and gilded snake had wreath'd itself,
    Who with her head nimble in threats approach'd
    The opening of his mouth; but suddenly,
    Seeing Orlando, it unlink'd itself,
    And with indented glides did slip away
    Into a bush; under which bush's shade
    A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
    Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
    When that the sleeping man should stir; for 'tis
    The royal disposition of that beast
    To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
    This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
    And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
  CELIA. O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
    And he did render him the most unnatural
    That liv'd amongst men.
  OLIVER. And well he might so do,
    For well I know he was unnatural.
  ROSALIND. But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
    Food to the suck'd and hungry lioness?
  OLIVER. Twice did he turn his back, and purpos'd so;
    But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
    And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
    Made him give battle to the lioness,
    Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling
    From miserable slumber I awak'd.
  CELIA. Are you his brother?
  ROSALIND. Was't you he rescu'd?
  CELIA. Was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
  OLIVER. 'Twas I; but 'tis not I. I do not shame
    To tell you what I was, since my conversion
    So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
  ROSALIND. But for the bloody napkin?
  OLIVER. By and by.
    When from the first to last, betwixt us two,
    Tears our recountments had most kindly bath'd,
    As how I came into that desert place-
    In brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
    Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
    Committing me unto my brother's love;
    Who led me instantly unto his cave,
    There stripp'd himself, and here upon his arm
    The lioness had torn some flesh away,
    Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
    And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
    Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound,
    And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
    He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
    To tell this story, that you might excuse
    His broken promise, and to give this napkin,
    Dy'd in his blood, unto the shepherd youth
    That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
                                               [ROSALIND swoons]
  CELIA. Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
  OLIVER. Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
  CELIA. There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
  OLIVER. Look, he recovers.
  ROSALIND. I would I were at home.
  CELIA. We'll lead you thither.
    I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
  OLIVER. Be of good cheer, youth. You a man!
    You lack a man's heart.
  ROSALIND. I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would think
    this was well counterfeited. I pray you tell your brother how
    well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!
  OLIVER. This was not counterfeit; there is too great testimony in
    your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.
  ROSALIND. Counterfeit, I assure you.
  OLIVER. Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
  ROSALIND. So I do; but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by
    right.
  CELIA. Come, you look paler and paler; pray you draw homewards.
    Good sir, go with us.
  OLIVER. That will I, for I must bear answer back
    How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. I shall devise something; but, I pray you, commend my
    counterfeiting to him. Will you go?                   Exeunt

ACT V. SCENE I. The forest

Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

  TOUCHSTONE. We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.
  AUDREY. Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
    gentleman's saying.
  TOUCHSTONE. A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext.
    But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to
    you.
  AUDREY. Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in the
    world; here comes the man you mean.

                         Enter WILLIAM

  TOUCHSTONE. It is meat and drink to me to see a clown. By my troth,
    we that have good wits have much to answer for: we shall be
    flouting; we cannot hold.
  WILLIAM. Good ev'n, Audrey.
  AUDREY. God ye good ev'n, William.
  WILLIAM. And good ev'n to you, sir.
  TOUCHSTONE. Good ev'n, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
    head; nay, prithee be cover'd. How old are you, friend?
  WILLIAM. Five and twenty, sir.
  TOUCHSTONE. A ripe age. Is thy name William?
  WILLIAM. William, sir.
  TOUCHSTONE. A fair name. Wast born i' th' forest here?
  WILLIAM. Ay, sir, I thank God.
  TOUCHSTONE. 'Thank God.' A good answer.
    Art rich?
  WILLIAM. Faith, sir, so so.
  TOUCHSTONE. 'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good; and
    yet it is not; it is but so so. Art thou wise?
  WILLIAM. Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
  TOUCHSTONE. Why, thou say'st well. I do now remember a saying: 'The
    fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be
    a fool.' The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a
    grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth; meaning
    thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. You do
    love this maid?
  WILLIAM. I do, sir.
  TOUCHSTONE. Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
  WILLIAM. No, sir.
  TOUCHSTONE. Then learn this of me: to have is to have; for it is a
    figure in rhetoric that drink, being pour'd out of cup into a
    glass, by filling the one doth empty the other; for all your
    writers do consent that ipse is he; now, you are not ipse, for I
    am he.
  WILLIAM. Which he, sir?
  TOUCHSTONE. He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
    clown, abandon- which is in the vulgar leave- the society- which
    in the boorish is company- of this female- which in the common is
    woman- which together is: abandon the society of this female; or,
    clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest;
    or, to wit, I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into
    death, thy liberty into bondage. I will deal in poison with thee,
    or in bastinado, or in steel; I will bandy with thee in faction;
    will o'er-run thee with policy; I will kill thee a hundred and
    fifty ways; therefore tremble and depart.
  AUDREY. Do, good William.
  WILLIAM. God rest you merry, sir.                         Exit

                          Enter CORIN

  CORIN. Our master and mistress seeks you; come away, away.
  TOUCHSTONE. Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey. I attend, I attend.
                                                          Exeunt

SCENE II. The forest

Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER

  ORLANDO. Is't possible that on so little acquaintance you should
    like her? that but seeing you should love her? and loving woo?
    and, wooing, she should grant? and will you persever to enjoy
    her?
  OLIVER. Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty
    of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden
    consenting; but say with me, I love Aliena; say with her that she
    loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other. It
    shall be to your good; for my father's house and all the revenue
    that was old Sir Rowland's will I estate upon you, and here live
    and die a shepherd.
  ORLANDO. You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow.
    Thither will I invite the Duke and all's contented followers. Go
    you and prepare Aliena; for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.

                        Enter ROSALIND

  ROSALIND. God save you, brother.
  OLIVER. And you, fair sister.                             Exit
  ROSALIND. O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear
    thy heart in a scarf!
  ORLANDO. It is my arm.
  ROSALIND. I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a
    lion.
  ORLANDO. Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
  ROSALIND. Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon
    when he show'd me your handkercher?
  ORLANDO. Ay, and greater wonders than that.
  ROSALIND. O, I know where you are. Nay, 'tis true. There was never
    any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and Caesar's
    thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and overcame.' For your brother
    and my sister no sooner met but they look'd; no sooner look'd but
    they lov'd; no sooner lov'd but they sigh'd; no sooner sigh'd but
    they ask'd one another the reason; no sooner knew the reason but
    they sought the remedy- and in these degrees have they made pair
    of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else
    be incontinent before marriage. They are in the very wrath of
    love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.
  ORLANDO. They shall be married to-morrow; and I will bid the Duke
    to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into
    happiness through another man's eyes! By so much the more shall I
    to-morrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I
    shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
  ROSALIND. Why, then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for
    Rosalind?
  ORLANDO. I can live no longer by thinking.
  ROSALIND. I will weary you, then, no longer with idle talking. Know
    of me then- for now I speak to some purpose- that I know you are
    a gentleman of good conceit. I speak not this that you should
    bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you
    are; neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in some
    little measure draw a belief from you, to do yourself good, and
    not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do
    strange things. I have, since I was three year old, convers'd
    with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable.
    If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries
    it out, when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her. I
    know into what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is not
    impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set
    her before your eyes to-morrow, human as she is, and without any
    danger.
  ORLANDO. Speak'st thou in sober meanings?
  ROSALIND. By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I say I
    am a magician. Therefore put you in your best array, bid your
    friends; for if you will be married to-morrow, you shall; and to
    Rosalind, if you will.

                     Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE

    Look, here comes a lover of mine, and a lover of hers.
  PHEBE. Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
    To show the letter that I writ to you.
  ROSALIND. I care not if I have. It is my study
    To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
    You are there follow'd by a faithful shepherd;
    Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
  PHEBE. Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
  SILVIUS. It is to be all made of sighs and tears;
    And so am I for Phebe.
  PHEBE. And I for Ganymede.
  ORLANDO. And I for Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. And I for no woman.
  SILVIUS. It is to be all made of faith and service;
    And so am I for Phebe.
  PHEBE. And I for Ganymede.
  ORLANDO. And I for Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. And I for no woman.
  SILVIUS. It is to be all made of fantasy,
    All made of passion, and all made of wishes;
    All adoration, duty, and observance,
    All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
    All purity, all trial, all obedience;
    And so am I for Phebe.
  PHEBE. And so am I for Ganymede.
  ORLANDO. And so am I for Rosalind.
  ROSALIND. And so am I for no woman.
  PHEBE. If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
  SILVIUS. If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
  ORLANDO. If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
  ROSALIND. Why do you speak too, 'Why blame you me to love you?'
  ORLANDO. To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
  ROSALIND. Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling of Irish
    wolves against the moon. [To SILVIUS] I will help you if I can.
    [To PHEBE] I would love you if I could.- To-morrow meet me all
    together. [ To PHEBE ] I will marry you if ever I marry woman,
    and I'll be married to-morrow. [To ORLANDO] I will satisfy you if
    ever I satisfied man, and you shall be married to-morrow. [To
    Silvius] I will content you if what pleases you contents you, and
    you shall be married to-morrow. [To ORLANDO] As you love
    Rosalind, meet. [To SILVIUS] As you love Phebe, meet;- and as I
    love no woman, I'll meet. So, fare you well; I have left you
    commands.
  SILVIUS. I'll not fail, if I live.
  PHEBE. Nor I.
  ORLANDO. Nor I.                                         Exeunt

SCENE III. The forest

Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

  TOUCHSTONE. To-morrow is the joyful day, Audre'y; to-morrow will we
    be married.
  AUDREY. I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is no
    dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world. Here come
    two of the banish'd Duke's pages.

                            Enter two PAGES

  FIRST PAGE. Well met, honest gentleman.
  TOUCHSTONE. By my troth, well met. Come sit, sit, and a song.
  SECOND PAGE. We are for you; sit i' th' middle.
  FIRST PAGE. Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking, or
    spitting, or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues
    to a bad voice?
  SECOND PAGE. I'faith, i'faith; and both in a tune, like two gipsies
    on a horse.

                      SONG.
        It was a lover and his lass,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
        That o'er the green corn-field did pass
          In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
        When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
        Sweet lovers love the spring.

        Between the acres of the rye,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
        These pretty country folks would lie,
          In the spring time, &c.

        This carol they began that hour,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
        How that a life was but a flower,
          In the spring time, &c.

        And therefore take the present time,
          With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
        For love is crowned with the prime,
          In the spring time, &c.

  TOUCHSTONE. Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
    matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untuneable.
  FIRST PAGE. YOU are deceiv'd, sir; we kept time, we lost not our
    time.
  TOUCHSTONE. By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear such
    a foolish song. God buy you; and God mend your voices. Come,
    Audrey.                                               Exeunt

SCENE IV. The forest

Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA

  DUKE SENIOR. Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
    Can do all this that he hath promised?
  ORLANDO. I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not:
    As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

               Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE

  ROSALIND. Patience once more, whiles our compact is urg'd:
    You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
    You will bestow her on Orlando here?
  DUKE SENIOR. That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
  ROSALIND. And you say you will have her when I bring her?
  ORLANDO. That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
  ROSALIND. You say you'll marry me, if I be willing?
  PHEBE. That will I, should I die the hour after.
  ROSALIND. But if you do refuse to marry me,
    You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
  PHEBE. So is the bargain.
  ROSALIND. You say that you'll have Phebe, if she will?
  SILVIUS. Though to have her and death were both one thing.
  ROSALIND. I have promis'd to make all this matter even.
    Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter;
    You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter;
    Keep your word, Phebe, that you'll marry me,
    Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd;
    Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her
    If she refuse me; and from hence I go,
    To make these doubts all even.
                                       Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
  DUKE SENIOR. I do remember in this shepherd boy
    Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.
  ORLANDO. My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
    Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
    But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
    And hath been tutor'd in the rudiments
    Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
    Whom he reports to be a great magician,
    Obscured in the circle of this forest.

                    Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY

  JAQUES. There is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are
    coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts which
    in all tongues are call'd fools.
  TOUCHSTONE. Salutation and greeting to you all!
  JAQUES. Good my lord, bid him welcome. This is the motley-minded
    gentleman that I have so often met in the forest. He hath been a
     courtier, he swears.
  TOUCHSTONE. If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation.
    I have trod a measure; I have flatt'red a lady; I have been
    politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy; I have undone
    three tailors; I have had four quarrels, and like to have fought
    one.
  JAQUES. And how was that ta'en up?
  TOUCHSTONE. Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
    seventh cause.
  JAQUES. How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.
  DUKE SENIOR. I like him very well.
  TOUCHSTONE. God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I press in
    here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear
    and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks. A
    poor virgin, sir, an ill-favour'd thing, sir, but mine own; a
    poor humour of mine, sir, to take that that man else will. Rich
    honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house; as your pearl
    in your foul oyster.
  DUKE SENIOR. By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
  TOUCHSTONE. According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet
    diseases.
  JAQUES. But, for the seventh cause: how did you find the quarrel on
    the seventh cause?
  TOUCHSTONE. Upon a lie seven times removed- bear your body more
    seeming, Audrey- as thus, sir. I did dislike the cut of a certain
    courtier's beard; he sent me word, if I said his beard was not
    cut well, he was in the mind it was. This is call'd the Retort
    Courteous. If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he would
    send me word he cut it to please himself. This is call'd the Quip
    Modest. If again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment.
    This is call'd the Reply Churlish. If again it was not well cut,
    he would answer I spake not true. This is call'd the Reproof
    Valiant. If again it was not well cut, he would say I lie. This
    is call'd the Countercheck Quarrelsome. And so to the Lie
    Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.
  JAQUES. And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
  TOUCHSTONE. I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial, nor
    he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we measur'd swords
    and parted.
  JAQUES. Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
  TOUCHSTONE. O, sir, we quarrel in print by the book, as you have
    books for good manners. I will name you the degrees. The first,
    the Retort Courteous; the second, the Quip Modest; the third, the
    Reply Churlish; the fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the
    Countercheck Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with Circumstance;
    the seventh, the Lie Direct. All these you may avoid but the Lie
    Direct; and you may avoid that too with an If. I knew when seven
    justices could not take up a quarrel; but when the parties were
    met themselves, one of them thought but of an If, as: 'If you
    said so, then I said so.' And they shook hands, and swore
    brothers. Your If is the only peace-maker; much virtue in If.
  JAQUES. Is not this a rare fellow, my lord?
    He's as good at any thing, and yet a fool.
  DUKE SENIOR. He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the
    presentation of that he shoots his wit:

          Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA. Still MUSIC

    HYMEN.    Then is there mirth in heaven,
              When earthly things made even
                Atone together.
              Good Duke, receive thy daughter;
              Hymen from heaven brought her,
                Yea, brought her hither,
              That thou mightst join her hand with his,
              Whose heart within his bosom is.
  ROSALIND. [To DUKE] To you I give myself, for I am yours.
    [To ORLANDO] To you I give myself, for I am yours.
  DUKE SENIOR. If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
  ORLANDO. If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
  PHEBE. If sight and shape be true,
    Why then, my love adieu!
  ROSALIND. I'll have no father, if you be not he;
    I'll have no husband, if you be not he;
    Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
  HYMEN.    Peace, ho! I bar confusion;
            'Tis I must make conclusion
              Of these most strange events.
            Here's eight that must take hands
            To join in Hymen's bands,
              If truth holds true contents.
            You and you no cross shall part;
            You and you are heart in heart;
            You to his love must accord,
            Or have a woman to your lord;
            You and you are sure together,
            As the winter to foul weather.
            Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,
            Feed yourselves with questioning,
            That reason wonder may diminish,
            How thus we met, and these things finish.

                       SONG
            Wedding is great Juno's crown;
              O blessed bond of board and bed!
            'Tis Hymen peoples every town;
              High wedlock then be honoured.
            Honour, high honour, and renown,
            To Hymen, god of every town!

  DUKE SENIOR. O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
    Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.
  PHEBE. I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;
    Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

                 Enter JAQUES de BOYS

  JAQUES de BOYS. Let me have audience for a word or two.
    I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
    That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
    Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
    Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
    Address'd a mighty power; which were on foot,
    In his own conduct, purposely to take
    His brother here, and put him to the sword;
    And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
    Where, meeting with an old religious man,
    After some question with him, was converted
    Both from his enterprise and from the world;
    His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
    And all their lands restor'd to them again
    That were with him exil'd. This to be true
    I do engage my life.
  DUKE SENIOR. Welcome, young man.
    Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
    To one, his lands withheld; and to the other,
    A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
    First, in this forest let us do those ends
    That here were well begun and well begot;
    And after, every of this happy number,
    That have endur'd shrewd days and nights with us,
    Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
    According to the measure of their states.
    Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity,
    And fall into our rustic revelry.
    Play, music; and you brides and bridegrooms all,
    With measure heap'd in joy, to th' measures fall.
  JAQUES. Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
    The Duke hath put on a religious life,
    And thrown into neglect the pompous court.
  JAQUES DE BOYS. He hath.
  JAQUES. To him will I. Out of these convertites
    There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.
    [To DUKE] You to your former honour I bequeath;
    Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
    [To ORLANDO] You to a love that your true faith doth merit;
    [To OLIVER] You to your land, and love, and great allies
    [To SILVIUS] You to a long and well-deserved bed;
    [To TOUCHSTONE] And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage
    Is but for two months victuall'd.- So to your pleasures;
    I am for other than for dancing measures.
  DUKE SENIOR. Stay, Jaques, stay.
  JAQUES. To see no pastime I. What you would have
    I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.               Exit
  DUKE SENIOR. Proceed, proceed. We will begin these rites,
    As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.    [A dance] Exeunt

EPILOGUE
                           EPILOGUE.
  ROSALIND. It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue; but
    it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. If it
    be true that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play
    needs no epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes; and
    good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. What a
    case am I in then, that am neither a good epilogue, nor cannot
    insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
    furnish'd like a beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. My
    way is to conjure you; and I'll begin with the women. I charge
    you, O women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of
    this play as please you; and I charge you, O men, for the love
    you bear to women- as I perceive by your simp'ring none of you
    hates them- that between you and the women the play may please.
    If I were a woman, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that
    pleas'd me, complexions that lik'd me, and breaths that I defied
    not; and, I am sure, as many as have good beards, or good faces,
    or sweet breaths, will, for my kind offer, when I make curtsy,
    bid me farewell.



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS



Contents

ACT I
Scene I. A hall in the Dukes palace.
Scene II. A public place.


ACT II
Scene I. A public place.
Scene II. The same.


ACT III
Scene I. The same.
Scene II. The same.


ACT IV
Scene I. The same.
Scene II. The same.
Scene III. The same.
Scene IV. The same.


ACT V
Scene I. The same.

Dramatis Person

SOLINUS, Duke of Ephesus.
EGEON, a Merchant of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS, Twin brothers and sons to Egeon and
ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE, Emilia, but unknown to each other.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS, Twin brothers, and attendants on
DROMIO OF SYRACUSE, the two Antipholuses.

BALTHASAR, a Merchant.
ANGELO, a Goldsmith.
A MERCHANT, friend to Antipholus of Syracuse.
PINCH, a Schoolmaster and a Conjurer.
EMILIA, Wife to Egeon, an Abbess at Ephesus.
ADRIANA, Wife to Antipholus of Ephesus.
LUCIANA, her Sister.
LUCE, her Servant.
A COURTESAN
Messenger, Jailer, Officers, Attendants

SCENE: Ephesus


ACT I

SCENE I. A hall in the Dukes palace.

 Enter Duke, Egeon, Jailer, Officers and other Attendants.

EGEON.
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall,
And by the doom of death end woes and all.

DUKE.
Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more.
I am not partial to infringe our laws.
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your Duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives,
Have seald his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threatning looks.
For since the mortal and intestine jars
Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed,
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns;
Nay more, if any born at Ephesus
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs;
Again, if any Syracusian born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate to the Dukes dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
Therefore by law thou art condemnd to die.

EGEON.
Yet this my comfort; when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.

DUKE.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Why thou departedst from thy native home,
And for what cause thou camst to Ephesus.

EGEON.
A heavier task could not have been imposd
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable;
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
Ill utter what my sorrow gives me leave.
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I livd in joy; our wealth increasd
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamnum, till my factors death,
And the great care of goods at random left,
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse;
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself (almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear)
Had made provision for her following me,
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons,
And, which was strange, the one so like the other
As could not be distinguishd but by names.
That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
A mean woman was delivered
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike.
Those, for their parents were exceeding poor,
I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return.
Unwilling I agreed; alas, too soon
We came aboard.
A league from Epidamnum had we saild
Before the always-wind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instance of our harm;
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death,
Which though myself would gladly have embracd,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
That mournd for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forcd me to seek delays for them and me.
And this it was (for other means was none).
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us.
My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
Had fastned him unto a small spare mast,
Such as sea-faring men provide for storms.
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other.
The children thus disposd, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixd,
Fastned ourselves at either end the mast,
And, floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
Dispersd those vapours that offended us,
And by the benefit of his wished light
The seas waxd calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far, making amain to us,
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this.
But ere they cameO, let me say no more!
Gather the sequel by that went before.

DUKE.
Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so,
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

EGEON.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily termd them merciless to us.
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encountered by a mighty rock,
Which being violently borne upon,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind,
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length another ship had seizd on us;
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their ship-wrackd guests,
And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me severd from my bliss,
That by misfortunes was my life prolongd
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.

DUKE.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favour to dilate at full
What have befalln of them and thee till now.

EGEON.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother, and importund me
That his attendant, so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retaind his name,
Might bear him company in the quest of him;
Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I lovd.
Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus,
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that or any place that harbours men.
But here must end the story of my life;
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.

DUKE.
Hapless Egeon, whom the fates have markd
To bear the extremity of dire mishap;
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
My soul should sue as advocate for thee.
But though thou art adjudged to the death,
And passed sentence may not be recalld
But to our honours great disparagement,
Yet will I favour thee in what I can.
Therefore, merchant, Ill limit thee this day
To seek thy health by beneficial help.
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live; if no, then thou art doomd to die.
Jailer, take him to thy custody.

JAILER.
I will, my lord.

EGEON.
Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A public place.

 Enter Antipholus and Dromio of Syracuse and a Merchant.

MERCHANT.
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
Is apprehended for arrival here,
And, not being able to buy out his life,
According to the statute of the town
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
There is your money that I had to keep.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
Within this hour it will be dinnertime;
Till that, Ill view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests.
What, will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my inn and dine with me?

MERCHANT.
I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit.
I crave your pardon. Soon, at five oclock,
Please you, Ill meet with you upon the mart,
And afterward consort you till bedtime.
My present business calls me from you now.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Farewell till then: I will go lose myself,
And wander up and down to view the city.

MERCHANT.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.

 [_Exit Merchant._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
I to the world am like a drop of water
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, failing there to find his fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself.
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus.

Here comes the almanac of my true date.
What now? How chance thou art returnd so soon?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Returnd so soon? rather approachd too late.
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek.
She is so hot because the meat is cold;
The meat is cold because you come not home;
You come not home because you have no stomach;
You have no stomach, having broke your fast;
But we that know what tis to fast and pray,
Are penitent for your default today.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Stop in your wind, sir, tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left the money that I gave you?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O, sixpence that I had o Wednesday last
To pay the saddler for my mistress crupper:
The saddler had it, sir, I kept it not.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I am not in a sportive humour now.
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how darst thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I pray you jest, sir, as you sit at dinner:
I from my mistress come to you in post;
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
And strike you home without a messenger.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season,
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me!

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast disposd thy charge.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner.
My mistress and her sister stay for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Now, as I am a Christian, answer me
In what safe place you have bestowd my money,
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks when I am undisposd;
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
Some of my mistress marks upon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thy mistress marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Your worships wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
What mean you, sir? for Gods sake hold your hands.
Nay, an you will not, sir, Ill take my heels.

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Upon my life, by some device or other
The villain is oer-raught of all my money.
They say this town is full of cozenage,
As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many such-like liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
Ill to the Centaur to go seek this slave.
I greatly fear my money is not safe.

 [_Exit._]



ACT II

SCENE I. A public place.

 Enter Adriana, wife to Antipholus (of Ephesus) with Luciana her
 sister.

ADRIANA.
Neither my husband nor the slave returnd
That in such haste I sent to seek his master?
Sure, Luciana, it is two oclock.

LUCIANA.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart hes somewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dine, and never fret;
A man is master of his liberty;
Time is their master, and when they see time,
Theyll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.

ADRIANA.
Why should their liberty than ours be more?

LUCIANA.
Because their business still lies out o door.

ADRIANA.
Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.

LUCIANA.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.

ADRIANA.
Theres none but asses will be bridled so.

LUCIANA.
Why, headstrong liberty is lashd with woe.
Theres nothing situate under heavens eye
But hath his bound in earth, in sea, in sky.
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls
Are their males subjects, and at their controls.
Man, more divine, the masters of all these,
Lord of the wide world and wild watry seas,
Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.

ADRIANA.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.

LUCIANA.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.

ADRIANA.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.

LUCIANA.
Ere I learn love, Ill practise to obey.

ADRIANA.
How if your husband start some other where?

LUCIANA.
Till he come home again, I would forbear.

ADRIANA.
Patience unmovd! No marvel though she pause;
They can be meek that have no other cause.
A wretched soul bruisd with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
But were we burdned with like weight of pain,
As much, or more, we should ourselves complain:
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience would relieve me:
But if thou live to see like right bereft,
This fool-beggd patience in thee will be left.

LUCIANA.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus.

ADRIANA.
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, hes at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.

ADRIANA.
Say, didst thou speak with him? knowst thou his mind?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear.
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.

LUCIANA.
Spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, he struck so plainly I could too well feel his blows; and withal
so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.

ADRIANA.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.

ADRIANA.
Horn-mad, thou villain?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I mean not cuckold-mad,
But sure hes stark mad.
When I desird him to come home to dinner,
He askd me for a thousand marks in gold.
Tis dinner time, quoth I. My gold, quoth he.
Your meat doth burn quoth I. My gold, quoth he.
Will you come home? quoth I. My gold, quoth he.
Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?
The pig quoth I is burnd. My gold, quoth he.
My mistress, sir, quoth I. Hang up thy mistress;
I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress!

LUCIANA.
Quoth who?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Quoth my master.
I know, quoth he, no house, no wife, no mistress.
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.

ADRIANA.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
For Gods sake, send some other messenger.

ADRIANA.
Back slave, or I will break thy pate across.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And he will bless that cross with other beating.
Between you I shall have a holy head.

ADRIANA.
Hence, prating peasant. Fetch thy master home.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Am I so round with you, as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither.
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.

 [_Exit._]

LUCIANA.
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.

ADRIANA.
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age th alluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it.
Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marrd,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
Thats not my fault; hes master of my state.
What ruins are in me that can be found
By him not ruind? Then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
A sunny look of his would soon repair;
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.

LUCIANA.
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence.

ADRIANA.
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,
Or else what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promisd me a chain;
Would that alone, a love he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed.
I see the jewel best enamelled
Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still
That others touch, yet often touching will
Wear gold; and no man that hath a name
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
Ill weep whats left away, and weeping die.

LUCIANA.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave
Is wanderd forth in care to seek me out.
By computation and mine hosts report.
I could not speak with Dromio since at first
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

How now, sir! is your merry humour alterd?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
You know no Centaur? you receivd no gold?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Villain, thou didst deny the golds receipt,
And toldst me of a mistress and a dinner,
For which I hope thou feltst I was displeasd.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein.
What means this jest, I pray you, master, tell me?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
Thinkst thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.

 [_Beats Dromio._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Hold, sir, for Gods sake, now your jest is earnest.
Upon what bargain do you give it me?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Do use you for my fool, and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love,
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanour to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Sconce, call you it? so you would leave battering, I had rather have it
a head. And you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head,
and ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I
pray, sir, why am I beaten?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Dost thou not know?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Shall I tell you why?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say, every why hath a wherefore.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, first, for flouting me; and then wherefore,
For urging it the second time to me.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason?
Well, sir, I thank you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thank me, sir, for what?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Ill make you amends next, to give you nothing for something.
But say, sir, is it dinner-time?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
In good time, sir, whats that?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Basting.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, then twill be dry.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Your reason?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Lest it make you choleric, and purchase me another dry basting.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time.
Theres a time for all things.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
By what rule, sir?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time
himself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Lets hear it.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Theres no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by
nature.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
May he not do it by fine and recovery?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another
man.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an
excrement?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath
scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, but theres many a man hath more hair than wit.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of
jollity.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
For what reason?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
For two, and sound ones too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, not sound, I pray you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Sure ones, then.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Certain ones, then.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Name them.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at
dinner they should not drop in his porridge.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, and did, sir; namely, een no time to recover hair lost by
nature.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
But your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, and therefore, to the worlds end
will have bald followers.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I knew twould be a bald conclusion.
But soft! who wafts us yonder?

 Enter Adriana and Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown,
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects.
I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.
The time was once when thou unurgd wouldst vow
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-savourd in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or lookd, or touchd, or carvd to thee.
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
That thou art then estranged from thyself?
Thyself I call it, being strange to me,
That, undividable, incorporate,
Am better than thy dear selfs better part.
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me;
For know, my love, as easy mayst thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take unmingled thence that drop again
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thyself, and not me too.
How dearly would it touch thee to the quick,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious?
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate?
Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me,
And hurl the name of husband in my face,
And tear the staind skin off my harlot brow,
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring,
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
I know thou canst; and therefore, see thou do it.
I am possessd with an adulterate blot;
My blood is mingled with the crime of lust;
For if we two be one, and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed,
I live distaind, thou undishonoured.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not.
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town as to your talk,
Who, every word by all my wit being scannd,
Wants wit in all one word to understand.

LUCIANA.
Fie, brother, how the world is changd with you.
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
By Dromio?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By me?

ADRIANA.
By thee; and this thou didst return from him,
That he did buffet thee, and in his blows
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
What is the course and drift of your compact?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I, sir? I never saw her till this time.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Villain, thou liest, for even her very words
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I never spake with her in all my life.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
How can she thus, then, call us by our names?
Unless it be by inspiration.

ADRIANA.
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood;
Be it my wrong, you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine.
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss,
Who all, for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap, and live on thy confusion.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme.
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty
Ill entertain the offerd fallacy.

LUCIANA.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
This is the fairy land; O spite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites;
If we obey them not, this will ensue:
Theyll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

LUCIANA.
Why pratst thou to thyself, and answerst not?
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am transformed, master, am I not?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou hast thine own form.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, I am an ape.

LUCIANA.
If thou art changd to aught, tis to an ass.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Tis true; she rides me, and I long for grass.
Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be
But I should know her as well as she knows me.

ADRIANA.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep
Whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner; Dromio, keep the gate.
Husband, Ill dine above with you today,
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
Come, sister; Dromio, play the porter well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking, mad, or well-advisd?
Known unto these, and to myself disguisd!
Ill say as they say, and persever so,
And in this mist at all adventures go.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?

ADRIANA.
Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.

LUCIANA.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT III

SCENE I. The same.

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus, his man Dromio of Ephesus, Angelo the
 goldsmith and Balthasar the merchant.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all,
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.
Say that I lingerd with you at your shop
To see the making of her carcanet,
And that tomorrow you will bring it home.
But heres a villain that would face me down.
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
And chargd him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know.
That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show;
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I think thou art an ass.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Marry, so it doth appear
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
I should kick, being kickd; and being at that pass,
You would keep from my heels, and beware of an ass.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Youre sad, Signior Balthasar; pray God our cheer
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.

BALTHASAR.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
O, Signior Balthasar, either at flesh or fish
A table full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish.

BALTHASAR.
Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And welcome more common, for thats nothing but words.

BALTHASAR
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest.
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
But soft; my door is lockd. Go bid them let us in.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicely, Gillian, Ginn!

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
[_Within._] Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch!
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch:
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou callst for such store
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in the street.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold ons feet.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Who talks within there? Ho, open the door.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Right, sir, Ill tell you when an youll tell me wherefore.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Wherefore? For my dinner. I have not dined today.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nor today here you must not; come again when you may.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
What art thou that keepst me out from the house I owe?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
The porter for this time, sir, and my name is Dromio.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name;
The one neer got me credit, the other mickle blame.
If thou hadst been Dromio today in my place,
Thou wouldst have changd thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.

 Enter Luce concealed from Antipholus of Ephesus and his companions.

LUCE.
[_Within._] What a coil is there, Dromio, who are those at the gate?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Let my master in, Luce.

LUCE.
Faith, no, he comes too late,
And so tell your master.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
O Lord, I must laugh;
Have at you with a proverb:Shall I set in my staff?

LUCE.
Have at you with another: thatsWhen? can you tell?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
If thy name be called Luce,Luce, thou hast answerd him well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Do you hear, you minion? youll let us in, I hope?

LUCE.
I thought to have askd you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
And you said no.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
So, come, help. Well struck, there was blow for blow.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou baggage, let me in.

LUCE.
Can you tell for whose sake?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Master, knock the door hard.

LUCE.
Let him knock till it ache.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Youll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.

LUCE.
What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?

 Enter Adriana concealed from Antipholus of Ephesus and his companions.

ADRIANA.
[_Within._] Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Are you there, wife? you might have come before.

ADRIANA.
Your wife, sir knave? go, get you from the door.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
If you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.

ANGELO.
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome. We would fain have either.

BALTHASAR.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake here is warm within; you stand here in the cold.
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Go, fetch me something, Ill break ope the gate.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Break any breaking here, and Ill break your knaves pate.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind;
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
It seems thou wantst breaking; out upon thee, hind!

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Heres too much out upon thee; I pray thee, let me in.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Well, Ill break in; go, borrow me a crow.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
A crow without feather; master, mean you so?
For a fish without a fin, theres a fowl without a feather.
If a crow help us in, sirrah, well pluck a crow together.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Go, get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.

BALTHASAR.
Have patience, sir. O, let it not be so:
Herein you war against your reputation,
And draw within the compass of suspect
The unviolated honour of your wife.
Once this,your long experience of her wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown;
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruld by me; depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening, come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it;
And that supposed by the common rout
Against your yet ungalled estimation
That may with foul intrusion enter in,
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession,
For ever housd where it gets possession.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You have prevaild. I will depart in quiet,
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle;
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
My wife (but, I protest, without desert)
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal;
To her will we to dinner.Get you home
And fetch the chain, by this I know tis made.
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine,
For theres the house. That chain will I bestow
(Be it for nothing but to spite my wife)
Upon mine hostess there. Good sir, make haste.
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
Ill knock elsewhere, to see if theyll disdain me.

ANGELO.
Ill meet you at that place some hour hence.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Do so; this jest shall cost me some expense.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Luciana with Antipholus of Syracuse.

LUCIANA.
And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husbands office? Shall, Antipholus,
Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealths sake use her with more kindness;
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth,
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness.
Let not my sister read it in your eye;
Be not thy tongue thy own shames orator;
Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyalty;
Apparel vice like virtues harbinger;
Bear a fair presence though your heart be tainted;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint,
Be secret-false. What need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
Tis double wrong to truant with your bed
And let her read it in thy looks at board.
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word.
Alas, poor women, make us but believe,
Being compact of credit, that you love us.
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
We in your motion turn, and you may move us.
Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife.
Tis holy sport to be a little vain
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Sweet mistress, what your name is else, I know not,
Nor by what wonder you do hit on mine;
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Than our earths wonder, more than earth divine.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak;
Lay open to my earthy gross conceit,
Smotherd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words deceit.
Against my souls pure truth why labour you
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me, then, and to your power Ill yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe.
Far more, far more, to you do I decline.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note
To drown me in thy sisters flood of tears.
Sing, siren, for thyself, and I will dote;
Spread oer the silver waves thy golden hairs,
And as a bed Ill take thee, and there lie,
And, in that glorious supposition think
He gains by death that hath such means to die.
Let love, being light, be drowned if she sink!

LUCIANA.
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.

LUCIANA.
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.

LUCIANA.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.

LUCIANA.
Why call you me love? Call my sister so.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thy sisters sister.

LUCIANA.
Thats my sister.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
No,
It is thyself, mine own selfs better part,
Mine eyes clear eye, my dear hearts dearer heart,
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hopes aim,
My sole earths heaven, and my heavens claim.

LUCIANA.
All this my sister is, or else should be.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Call thyself sister, sweet, for I aim thee;
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life;
Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife.
Give me thy hand.

LUCIANA.
O, soft, sir, hold you still;
Ill fetch my sister to get her goodwill.

 [_Exit Luciana._]

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, how now, Dromio? where runnst thou so fast?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? Am I myself?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I am an ass, I am a womans man, and besides myself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What womans man? and how besides thyself?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman, one that claims me,
one that haunts me, one that will have me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What claim lays she to thee?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse, and she would
have me as a beast; not that I being a beast she would have me, but
that she being a very beastly creature lays claim to me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What is she?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without
he say sir-reverence. I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is
she a wondrous fat marriage.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
How dost thou mean a fat marriage?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, shes the kitchen wench, and all grease, and I know not
what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by
her own light. I warrant her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
Poland winter. If she lives till doomsday, shell burn a week longer
than the whole world.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What complexion is she of?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. For why?
she sweats, a man may go overshoes in the grime of it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thats a fault that water will mend.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir, tis in grain; Noahs flood could not do it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Whats her name?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, thats an ell and three
quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Then she bears some breadth?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. She is spherical,
like a globe. I could find out countries in her.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
In what part of her body stands Ireland?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, sir, in her buttocks; I found it out by the bogs.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where Scotland?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where France?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war against her hair.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where England?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them.
But I guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between
France and it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where Spain?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Faith, I saw it not; but I felt it hot in her breath.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where America, the Indies?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, sir, upon her nose, all oer-embellished with rubies, carbuncles,
sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who
sent whole armadoes of carracks to be ballast at her nose.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude: this drudge or diviner laid
claim to me, called me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what
privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my
neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I, amazed, ran from her as a
witch. And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my
heart of steel, she had transformed me to a curtal dog, and made me
turn i the wheel.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Go, hie thee presently, post to the road;
And if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbour in this town tonight.
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If everyone knows us, and we know none,
Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Theres none but witches do inhabit here,
And therefore tis high time that I were hence.
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Possessd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself.
But lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
Ill stop mine ears against the mermaids song.

 Enter Angelo with the chain.

ANGELO.
Master Antipholus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, thats my name.

ANGELO.
I know it well, sir. Lo, here is the chain;
I thought to have taen you at the Porpentine,
The chain unfinishd made me stay thus long.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What is your will that I shall do with this?

ANGELO.
What please yourself, sir; I have made it for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.

ANGELO.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Go home with it, and please your wife withal,
And soon at supper-time Ill visit you,
And then receive my money for the chain.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
For fear you neer see chain nor money more.

ANGELO.
You are a merry man, sir; fare you well.

 [_Exit._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What I should think of this I cannot tell,
But this I think, theres no man is so vain
That would refuse so fair an offerd chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
Ill to the mart, and there for Dromio stay;
If any ship put out, then straight away.

 [_Exit._]



ACT IV

SCENE I. The same.

 Enter Merchant, Angelo and an Officer.

MERCHANT.
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importund you,
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage;
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or Ill attach you by this officer.

ANGELO.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you
He had of me a chain; at five oclock
I shall receive the money for the same.
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too.

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio of Ephesus from the
 Courtesans.

OFFICER.
That labour may you save. See where he comes.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
While I go to the goldsmiths house, go thou
And buy a ropes end; that will I bestow
Among my wife and her confederates
For locking me out of my doors by day.
But soft, I see the goldsmith; get thee gone;
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy a rope!

 [_Exit Dromio._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
A man is well holp up that trusts to you,
I promised your presence and the chain,
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Belike you thought our love would last too long
If it were chaind together, and therefore came not.

ANGELO.
Saving your merry humour, heres the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion,
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
Than I stand debted to this gentleman.
I pray you, see him presently dischargd,
For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I am not furnished with the present money;
Besides, I have some business in the town.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house,
And with you take the chain, and bid my wife
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof;
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

ANGELO.
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
No, bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.

ANGELO.
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And if I have not, sir, I hope you have,
Or else you may return without your money.

ANGELO.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain;
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Good Lord, you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.

MERCHANT.
The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.

ANGELO.
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.

ANGELO.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain or send by me some token.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath.
Come, wheres the chain? I pray you, let me see it.

MERCHANT.
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Good sir, say wheer youll answer me or no;
If not, Ill leave him to the officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I answer you? What should I answer you?

ANGELO.
The money that you owe me for the chain.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I owe you none till I receive the chain.

ANGELO.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.

ANGELO.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.
Consider how it stands upon my credit.

MERCHANT.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.

OFFICER.
I do, and charge you in the dukes name to obey me.

ANGELO.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me,
Or I attach you by this officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Consent to pay thee that I never had?
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darst.

ANGELO.
Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer.
I would not spare my brother in this case
If he should scorn me so apparently.

OFFICER.
I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
As all the metal in your shop will answer.

ANGELO.
Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse from the bay.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, theres a bark of Epidamnum
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And then, sir, bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
I have conveyd aboard, and I have bought
The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
Blows fair from land; they stay for nought at all
But for their owner, master, and yourself.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
How now? a madman? Why, thou peevish sheep,
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope,
And told thee to what purpose and what end.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
You sent me for a ropes end as soon.
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I will debate this matter at more leisure,
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her in the desk
Thats coverd oer with Turkish tapestry
There is a purse of ducats; let her send it.
Tell her I am arrested in the street,
And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave; be gone.
On, officer, to prison till it come.

 [_Exeunt Merchant, Angelo, Officer and Antipholus of Ephesus._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
To Adriana, that is where we dind,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband.
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
Thither I must, although against my will,
For servants must their masters minds fulfil.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE II. The same.

 Enter Adriana and Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye
That he did plead in earnest, yea or no?
Lookd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation madst thou in this case
Of his hearts meteors tilting in his face?

LUCIANA.
First he denied you had in him no right.

ADRIANA.
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.

LUCIANA.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.

ADRIANA.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.

LUCIANA.
Then pleaded I for you.

ADRIANA.
And what said he?

LUCIANA.
That love I beggd for you he beggd of me.

ADRIANA.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?

LUCIANA.
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.

ADRIANA.
Didst speak him fair?

LUCIANA.
Have patience, I beseech.

ADRIANA.
I cannot, nor I will not hold me still.
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old, and sere,
Ill-facd, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind,
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.

LUCIANA.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is waild when it is gone.

ADRIANA.
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
And yet would herein others eyes were worse:
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away;
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Here, go; the desk, the purse, sweet now, make haste.

LUCIANA.
How hast thou lost thy breath?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
By running fast.

ADRIANA.
Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, hes in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him,
One whose hard heart is buttond up with steel;
A fiend, a fairy, pitiless and rough;
A wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff;
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands
The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands;
A hound that runs counter, and yet draws dryfoot well,
One that, before the judgment, carries poor souls to hell.

ADRIANA.
Why, man, what is the matter?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I do not know the matter. He is rested on the case.

ADRIANA.
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested, well;
But hes in a suit of buff which rested him, that can I tell.
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?

ADRIANA.
Go fetch it, sister. This I wonder at,

 [_Exit Luciana._]

Thus he unknown to me should be in debt.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;
A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?

ADRIANA.
What, the chain?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No, no, the bell, tis time that I were gone.
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.

ADRIANA.
The hours come back! That did I never hear.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, a turns back for very fear.

ADRIANA.
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou reason!

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than hes worth to season.
Nay, hes a thief too. Have you not heard men say
That time comes stealing on by night and day?
If he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

 Enter Luciana.

ADRIANA.
Go, Dromio, theres the money, bear it straight,
And bring thy master home immediately.
Come, sister, I am pressd down with conceit;
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. The same.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Theres not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well-acquainted friend,
And everyone doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me, some invite me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me commodities to buy.
Even now a tailor calld me in his shop,
And showd me silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles,
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.

 Enter Dromio of Syracuse.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, heres the gold you sent me for.
What, have you got the picture of old Adam new apparelled?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not that Adam that kept the paradise, but that Adam that keeps the
prison; he that goes in the calfs skin that was killed for the
Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
forsake your liberty.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I understand thee not.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
No? Why, tis a plain case: he that went like a bass-viol in a case of
leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a
sob, and rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives
them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits
with his mace than a morris-pike.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
What! thou meanst an officer?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it
that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed, and
says, God give you good rest.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any ship puts forth
tonight? may we be gone?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark _Expedition_
put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry
for the hoy _Delay_. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver
you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
The fellow is distract, and so am I,
And here we wander in illusions.
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!

 Enter a Courtesan.

COURTESAN.
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.
Is that the chain you promisd me today?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
It is the devil.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devils dam; and here she comes in the
habit of a light wench, and thereof comes that the wenches say God
damn me, thats as much to say, God make me a light wench. It is
written they appear to men like angels of light. Light is an effect of
fire, and fire will burn; ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near
her.

COURTESAN.
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
Will you go with me? Well mend our dinner here.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat, or bespeak a long spoon.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Why, Dromio?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Avoid then, fiend! What tellst thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress.
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.

COURTESAN.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promisd,
And Ill be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Some devils ask but the paring of ones nail,
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
A nut, a cherry-stone; but she, more covetous,
Would have a chain.
Master, be wise; and if you give it her,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.

COURTESAN.
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain;
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Fly pride, says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse._]

COURTESAN.
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself.
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
And for the same he promisd me a chain;
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told today at dinner
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
He rushd into my house and took perforce
My ring away. This course I fittest choose,
For forty ducats is too much to lose.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE IV. The same.

 Enter Antipholus of Ephesus with an Officer.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Fear me not, man, I will not break away:
Ill give thee ere I leave thee so much money,
To warrant thee, as I am rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood today,
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attachd in Ephesus;
I tell you twill sound harshly in her ears.

 Enter Dromio of Ephesus with a ropes end.

Here comes my man. I think he brings the money.
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Heres that, I warrant you, will pay them all.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
But wheres the money?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ill serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
To a ropes end, sir; and to that end am I returnd.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.

 [_Beating him._]

OFFICER.
Good sir, be patient.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, tis for me to be patient. I am in adversity.

OFFICER.
Good now, hold thy tongue.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou whoreson, senseless villain.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I am an ass indeed; you may prove it by my long ears. I have served him
from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with
beating; when I am warm he cools me with beating. I am waked with it
when I sleep, raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with it
when I go from home, welcomed home with it when I return. Nay, I bear
it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat; and I think when he hath
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.

 Enter Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan and a Schoolmaster called Pinch.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Come, go along, my wife is coming yonder.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Mistress, _respice finem_, respect your end, or rather, the prophesy
like the parrot, Beware the ropes end.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Wilt thou still talk?

 [_Beats him._]

COURTESAN.
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?

ADRIANA.
His incivility confirms no less.
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.

LUCIANA.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!

COURTESAN.
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.

PINCH.
Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.

PINCH.
I charge thee, Satan, housd within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers,
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Peace, doting wizard, peace; I am not mad.

ADRIANA.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house today,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut,
And I denied to enter in my house?

ADRIANA.
O husband, God doth know you dind at home,
Where would you had remaind until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Dind at home? Thou villain, what sayest thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Were not my doors lockd up and I shut out?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Perdy, your doors were lockd, and you shut out.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And did not she herself revile me there?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sans fable, she herself revild you there.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Certes, she did, the kitchen-vestal scornd you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
In verity, you did; my bones bear witness,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.

ADRIANA.
Ist good to soothe him in these contraries?

PINCH.
It is no shame; the fellow finds his vein,
And yielding to him, humours well his frenzy.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Thou hast subornd the goldsmith to arrest me.

ADRIANA.
Alas! I sent you money to redeem you
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Money by me? Heart and goodwill you might,
But surely, master, not a rag of money.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Wentst not thou to her for a purse of ducats?

ADRIANA.
He came to me, and I deliverd it.

LUCIANA.
And I am witness with her that she did.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope.

PINCH.
Mistress, both man and master is possessd,
I know it by their pale and deadly looks.
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth today,
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?

ADRIANA.
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And gentle master, I receivd no gold;
But I confess, sir, that we were lockd out.

ADRIANA.
Dissembling villain, thou speakst false in both.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all,
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me.
But with these nails Ill pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.

 [_Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives. _]

ADRIANA.
O, bind him, bind him; let him not come near me.

PINCH.
More company; the fiend is strong within him.

LUCIANA.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
What, will you murder me? Thou jailer, thou,
I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them
To make a rescue?

OFFICER.
Masters, let him go.
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.

PINCH.
Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.

ADRIANA.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?

OFFICER.
He is my prisoner. If I let him go,
The debt he owes will be requird of me.

ADRIANA.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee;
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Good master doctor, see him safe conveyd
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
O most unhappy strumpet!

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Master, I am here enterd in bond for you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Will you be bound for nothing? Be mad, good master; cry, the devil.

LUCIANA.
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!

ADRIANA.
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.

 [_Exeunt Pinch and Assistants, with Antipholus of Ephesus and Dromio
 of Ephesus._]

Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?

OFFICER.
One Angelo, a goldsmith; do you know him?

ADRIANA.
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?

OFFICER.
Two hundred ducats.

ADRIANA.
Say, how grows it due?

OFFICER.
Due for a chain your husband had of him.

ADRIANA.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.

COURTESAN.
When as your husband, all in rage, today
Came to my house and took away my ring,
The ring I saw upon his finger now,
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.

ADRIANA.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come, jailer, bring me where the goldsmith is,
I long to know the truth hereof at large.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse with his rapier drawn, and Dromio of
 Syracuse.

LUCIANA.
God, for thy mercy, they are loose again!

ADRIANA.
And come with naked swords. Lets call more help
To have them bound again.

OFFICER.
Away, theyll kill us.

 [_Exeunt, as fast as may be, frighted._]

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I see these witches are afraid of swords.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence.
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Faith, stay here this night, they will surely do us no harm; you saw
they speak us fair, give us gold. Methinks they are such a gentle
nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and turn witch.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I will not stay tonight for all the town;
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT V

SCENE I. The same.

 Enter Merchant and Angelo.

ANGELO.
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinderd you,
But I protest he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.

MERCHANT.
How is the man esteemd here in the city?

ANGELO.
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly belovd,
Second to none that lives here in the city.
His word might bear my wealth at any time.

MERCHANT.
Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.

 Enter Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse.

ANGELO.
Tis so; and that self chain about his neck
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir, draw near to me, Ill speak to him.
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble,
And not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
This chain, which now you wear so openly.
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea today.
This chain you had of me, can you deny it?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think I had: I never did deny it.

MERCHANT.
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?

MERCHANT.
These ears of mine, thou knowst, did hear thee.
Fie on thee, wretch. Tis pity that thou livst
To walk where any honest men resort.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus;
Ill prove mine honour and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou darst stand.

MERCHANT.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.

 [_They draw._]

 Enter Adriana, Luciana, Courtesan and others.

ADRIANA.
Hold, hurt him not, for Gods sake, he is mad.
Some get within him, take his sword away.
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Run, master, run, for Gods sake, take a house.
This is some priory; in, or we are spoild.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse to the
 priory._]

 Enter Lady Abbess.

ABBESS.
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?

ADRIANA.
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.

ANGELO.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.

MERCHANT.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.

ABBESS.
How long hath this possession held the man?

ADRIANA.
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was.
But till this afternoon his passion
Neer brake into extremity of rage.

ABBESS.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Strayd his affection in unlawful love?
A sin prevailing much in youthful men
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing?
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?

ADRIANA.
To none of these, except it be the last,
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.

ABBESS.
You should for that have reprehended him.

ADRIANA.
Why, so I did.

ABBESS.
Ay, but not rough enough.

ADRIANA.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.

ABBESS.
Haply in private.

ADRIANA.
And in assemblies too.

ABBESS.
Ay, but not enough.

ADRIANA.
It was the copy of our conference.
In bed he slept not for my urging it;
At board he fed not for my urging it;
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
In company I often glanced it;
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.

ABBESS.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
The venom clamours of a jealous woman
Poisons more deadly than a mad dogs tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hindered by thy railing,
And thereof comes it that his head is light.
Thou sayst his meat was saucd with thy upbraidings.
Unquiet meals make ill digestions;
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred,
And whats a fever but a fit of madness?
Thou sayst his sports were hinderd by thy brawls.
Sweet recreation barrd, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest
To be disturbd would mad or man or beast.
The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits
Hath scard thy husband from the use ofs wits.

LUCIANA.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
When he demeand himself rough, rude, and wildly.
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?

ADRIANA.
She did betray me to my own reproof.
Good people, enter and lay hold on him.

ABBESS.
No, not a creature enters in my house.

ADRIANA.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.

ABBESS.
Neither. He took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or lose my labour in assaying it.

ADRIANA.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
And will have no attorney but myself;
And therefore let me have him home with me.

ABBESS.
Be patient, for I will not let him stir
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again.
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order;
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me.

ADRIANA.
I will not hence and leave my husband here;
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.

ABBESS.
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.

 [_Exit Abbess._]

LUCIANA.
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.

ADRIANA.
Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feet,
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.

MERCHANT.
By this, I think, the dial points at five.
Anon, Im sure, the Duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.

ANGELO.
Upon what cause?

MERCHANT.
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Who put unluckily into this bay
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.

ANGELO.
See where they come. We will behold his death.

LUCIANA.
Kneel to the Duke before he pass the abbey.

 Enter the Duke, attended; Egeon, bareheaded; with the Headsman and
 other Officers.

DUKE.
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die; so much we tender him.

ADRIANA.
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!

DUKE.
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady,
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.

ADRIANA.
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
Who I made lord of me and all I had
At your important letters, this ill day
A most outrageous fit of madness took him;
That desprately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondman all as mad as he,
Doing displeasure to the citizens
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
Rings, jewels, anything his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed.
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
He broke from those that had the guard of him,
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
Met us again, and, madly bent on us,
Chased us away; till raising of more aid,
We came again to bind them. Then they fled
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them.
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us,
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.

DUKE.
Long since thy husband servd me in my wars,
And I to thee engagd a princes word,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey gate,
And bid the lady abbess come to me.
I will determine this before I stir.

 Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER.
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself.
My master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor,
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire,
And ever as it blazed they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair.
My master preaches patience to him, and the while
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool;
And sure (unless you send some present help)
Between them they will kill the conjurer.

ADRIANA.
Peace, fool, thy master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to us.

MESSENGER.
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true.
I have not breathd almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.

 [_Cry within._]

Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, be gone!

DUKE.
Come, stand by me, fear nothing. Guard with halberds.

ADRIANA.
Ay me, it is my husband. Witness you
That he is borne about invisible.
Even now we housd him in the abbey here,
And now hes there, past thought of human reason.

 Enter Antipholus and Dromio of Ephesus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Justice, most gracious duke; O, grant me justice!
Even for the service that long since I did thee
When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.

EGEON.
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there.
She whom thou gavst to me to be my wife;
That hath abused and dishonourd me
Even in the strength and height of injury.
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.

DUKE.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me
While she with harlots feasted in my house.

DUKE.
A grievous fault. Say, woman, didst thou so?

ADRIANA.
No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sister
Today did dine together. So befall my soul
As this is false he burdens me withal.

LUCIANA.
Neer may I look on day nor sleep on night
But she tells to your highness simple truth.

ANGELO.
O perjurd woman! They are both forsworn.
In this the madman justly chargeth them.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbd with the effect of wine,
Nor heady-rash, provokd with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman lockd me out this day from dinner.
That goldsmith there, were he not packd with her,
Could witness it, for he was with me then,
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthasar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him. In the street I met him,
And in his company that gentleman.
There did this perjurd goldsmith swear me down
That I this day of him receivd the chain,
Which, God he knows, I saw not. For the which
He did arrest me with an officer.
I did obey, and sent my peasant home
For certain ducats. He with none returnd.
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By th way we met
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vile confederates. Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller;
A needy, hollow-eyd, sharp-looking wretch;
A living dead man. This pernicious slave,
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
And gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no face (as twere) outfacing me,
Cries out, I was possessd. Then altogether
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence,
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together,
Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gaind my freedom and immediately
Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames and great indignities.

ANGELO.
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
That he dind not at home, but was lockd out.

DUKE.
But had he such a chain of thee, or no?

ANGELO.
He had, my lord, and when he ran in here
These people saw the chain about his neck.

MERCHANT.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
Heard you confess you had the chain of him,
After you first forswore it on the mart,
And thereupon I drew my sword on you;
And then you fled into this abbey here,
From whence I think you are come by miracle.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never came within these abbey walls,
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me.
I never saw the chain, so help me heaven;
And this is false you burden me withal.

DUKE.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
I think you all have drunk of Circes cup.
If here you housd him, here he would have been.
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
You say he dind at home, the goldsmith here
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.

COURTESAN.
He did, and from my finger snatchd that ring.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Tis true, my liege, this ring I had of her.

DUKE.
Sawst thou him enter at the abbey here?

COURTESAN.
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.

DUKE.
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
I think you are all mated, or stark mad.

 [_Exit one to the Abbess._]

EGEON.
Most mighty Duke, vouchsafe me speak a word;
Haply I see a friend will save my life
And pay the sum that may deliver me.

DUKE.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.

EGEON.
Is not your name, sir, calld Antipholus?
And is not that your bondman Dromio?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Within this hour I was his bondman, sir,
But he, I thank him, gnawd in two my cords.
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.

EGEON.
I am sure you both of you remember me.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you.
For lately we were bound as you are now.
You are not Pinchs patient, are you, sir?

EGEON.
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never saw you in my life till now.

EGEON.
O! grief hath changd me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with times deformed hand,
Have written strange defeatures in my face.
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Neither.

EGEON.
Dromio, nor thou?

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
No, trust me, sir, nor I.

EGEON.
I am sure thou dost.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are
now bound to believe him.

EGEON.
Not know my voice! O times extremity,
Hast thou so crackd and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untund cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming winters drizzled snow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear.
All these old witnesses, I cannot err,
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I never saw my father in my life.

EGEON.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
Thou knowst we parted; but perhaps, my son,
Thou shamst to acknowledge me in misery.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
The duke and all that know me in the city,
Can witness with me that it is not so.
I neer saw Syracusa in my life.

DUKE.
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
During which time he neer saw Syracusa.
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.

 Enter the Abbess with Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse.

ABBESS.
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrongd.

 [_All gather to see them._]

ADRIANA.
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.

DUKE.
One of these men is _genius_ to the other;
And so of these, which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
I, sir, am Dromio, command him away.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
I, sir, am Dromio, pray let me stay.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
Egeon, art thou not? or else his ghost?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
O, my old master, who hath bound him here?

ABBESS.
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds,
And gain a husband by his liberty.
Speak, old Egeon, if thou best the man
That hadst a wife once called Emilia,
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons.
O, if thou best the same Egeon, speak,
And speak unto the same Emilia!

DUKE.
Why, here begins his morning story right:
These two Antipholus, these two so like,
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea.
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.

EGEON.
If I dream not, thou art Emilia.
If thou art she, tell me where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?

ABBESS.
By men of Epidamnum, he and I
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up;
But, by and by, rude fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio and my son from them,
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
What then became of them I cannot tell;
I to this fortune that you see me in.

DUKE.
Antipholus, thou camst from Corinth first?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
No, sir, not I, I came from Syracuse.

DUKE.
Stay, stand apart, I know not which is which.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
And I with him.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.

ADRIANA.
Which of you two did dine with me today?

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I, gentle mistress.

ADRIANA.
And are not you my husband?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
No, I say nay to that.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
And so do I, yet did she call me so;
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Did call me brother. What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good,
If this be not a dream I see and hear.

ANGELO.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
I think it be, sir. I deny it not.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.

ANGELO.
I think I did, sir. I deny it not.

ADRIANA.
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail
By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
No, none by me.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
This purse of ducats I receivd from you,
And Dromio my man did bring them me.
I see we still did meet each others man,
And I was taen for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
These ducats pawn I for my father here.

DUKE.
It shall not need, thy father hath his life.

COURTESAN.
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.

ABBESS.
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here,
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes;
And all that are assembled in this place,
That by this sympathised one days error
Have sufferd wrong, go, keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
Of you, my sons, and till this present hour
My heavy burden neer delivered.
The duke, my husband, and my children both,
And you, the calendars of their nativity,
Go to a gossips feast, and go with me.
After so long grief, such nativity.

DUKE.
With all my heart, Ill gossip at this feast.

 [_Exeunt except the two Dromios and two Brothers._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?

ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS.
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarkd?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

ANTIPHOLUS OF SYRACUSE.
He speaks to me; I am your master, Dromio.
Come, go with us. Well look to that anon.
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.

 [_Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Antipholus of Ephesus._]

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
There is a fat friend at your masters house,
That kitchend me for you today at dinner.
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother.
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Not I, sir, you are my elder.

DROMIO OF EPHESUS.
Thats a question, how shall we try it?

DROMIO OF SYRACUSE.
Well draw c
